Benji B
How are you doing, sir?
David Rodigan 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much. This is a very special night for me.
Thank you to Fabric. Thank you to Red Bull and Benji and John and Ricky and
Mark who said, “Roders, we need to do this.” Thank you to each and every one
of you for being here. I hope you’ll enjoy the story.
BENJI B 
Should that have been Sir David ‘Ram Jam’ Rodigan? You were always a sir to us
before anyway but for those of you that didn’t know, David Rodigan received an
MBE from the Queen this year. I think that gets him another round of applause.
[applause]
You were always Sir David ‘Ram Jam’ before you were officially part of royalty
now.
David Rodigan 
It was an honour, obviously, but more importantly it was, I believe, the
respect shown to the music which I’ve spent my whole life playing and loving.
I think the indication from the government and the Queen was that this music
has become so much a part of our culture and I’ve been broadcasting it for
over 30 years, so I believe that the award was as much for the music as it was
for me. I’d like to think that anyway. I’m certain that that is the case. It
is indeed an honour. Prince Charles actually said to me when I approached him,
he asks you a couple of questions, he said, “Do you really love this music?” I
said, “Yeah.” He said, “So do I.” He said, “How did you fall in love?”
[laughter]
No, seriously. He said, “I love Jamaica.” I think it would be hard not to like
Jamaica. He said, “How did you fall in love with it?” I said, “In the ’60s.”
Then he asked me, “What time is the show on?” I plugged the show and said 11
o’clock. The fact is that we’re hearing the stories in the press about Prince
Harry and his visit to Jamaica. I think anyone who goes to that island will be
struck by the music. Particularly back in the day when the music was
incredibly melodic and soulful. I would always leave Jamaica with at least
half a dozen songs in my head that I had to buy. In more recent times it’s
more (imitates dancehall beat) ‘dum-dum, dum-dum’ but in those days it was
much more melodic. I’m talking about the ’70s. Harry apparently came back and
started buying reggae records, if we’re to believe what we read in the press.
I’m sure that’s true because reggae is infectious. As far as I’m concerned,
it’s a fever. There is no known antidote. I’ve had the fever all my life.
[laughs]
BENJI B 
Talking of which, I grew up listening to, like so many people in the room, you
on both Capital and Kiss and, of course, on untold cassettes of you at famous
clashes. Your work spans so many different generations that people in this
room might have come into contact with it at different points in their life.
Can you just clear it up for us? How long have you been broadcasting and how
long have you been DJing at this point?
David Rodigan 
I started broadcasting professionally in 1978. Maths, simple maths, tells you
that it’s 34 years. DJing in my bedroom and house parties and youth clubs and
school discotheques from 1967 when I was 16. I remember playing in the school
disco a song called “Dry Acid” by The Upsetters, in 1969. It blew the place
apart. That was the first time I ever experienced a public forward. If the
term “pull-up” had been invented then I would have said, “Pull up,” but it
wasn’t. It was on the school sound system, the public address system. I think
if anyone’s in this room who has an obsession, and probably many of you do
with music, you’ll know that… I remember Roger Scott who was my mentor at
Capital Radio. I just thought Roger Scott epitomized, broadcasting because
apart from his passion for Bruce Springsteen, his passion for music enabled
him to say little and yet say so much about songs. I always remember him
describing how he would play records in his front room and look out behind the
curtains to see if anyone on the street passing was taking any notice of what
he was playing. I used to do the same thing, only I did it in my bedroom
looking in the backyard to see if any of the kids were taking any notice of
what I was playing. It’s that feeling you have, and you know this, Benji, as a
DJ yourself, of wanting to share something that you think is so precious and
so important. That’s what I’ve always loved to do. It led to DJing by default
really publicly because I was working as a young actor and I didn’t think that
I would ever get a job on radio as a DJ. But there was an audition at BBC
Radio London and I ended up with that show in 1978.
BENJI B 
You’re talking about working as an actor. You studied as an actor, right? You
went to drama school.
David Rodigan 
Yes. I studied economics for a year when I left, after I did my A levels
because everyone told me, “You should do something with your life. You can’t
be an actor.” Well, DJ wasn’t even considered… I have to point out actually,
with all due respect to any DJ in the room right now, that being a DJ in the
’60s was not terribly cool at all. In fact, a DJ was often a nerdish guy in
the corner with the records. “Get Roders to come and play because he’s got the
records.” But why do you to want to be a DJ? Because if you’re a DJ you can’t
check girls, you can’t dance with anyone. You’re stuck in a corner with a
bunch of records. DJing has evolved now. It’s funny because, “Oh, you’re a
DJ.” There was a time when it really wasn’t that cool to be a DJ as such. But
I was a record collector and so were many of my friends. It was about records.
Our world revolved around music. I didn’t enjoy studying economics, I wanted
to work in a theatre. I was offered a place at the Rose Bruford College where
I did a three-year drama and teaching course. I thoroughly enjoyed the
teaching practices across the three years. I was very tempted and I almost
took a position to teach drama at Orpington Boys School. That was in 1974. In
that same summer I’d done a dramatization of Yevtushenko’s Zima Junction. I
presented it myself, funded it myself with a little theatre in St. Martins
Lane. As a result of that presentation an actor manager from the North of
England auditioned me and offered me a part as an acting ASM. You were an
actor, you were an assistant stage manager. You did small parts. You did
everything else, dogs, bodywork, costumes, you name it. That was how I
started, working in repertoire theatres in the North of England. But I was
still collecting this music. I remember being a deck chair attendant in Hyde
Park in the summer of 1970 and going home and listening to U-Roy records in my
bedroom. I knew it had become an obsession with me and I was fascinated by the
sounds that were created. Of course, it was a very different world then. You
had to do a lot of detective work to figure out how these records were made,
where they came from, and who was this artist, who was this producer, who was
this band leader. You were dependent upon using your ears, your eyes to look
at record labels and just try to figure things out. There was no Internet. You
couldn’t phone Jamaica. There was hardly anything written. I remember on the
Melody Maker, they actually did a piece on reggae. I remember sitting in my
bedroom, cutting it up, and making it into a record sleeve, the whole article.
This is how precious… Someone had actually bothered to write about this music.
That’s how important it was to me. That’s how I started DJing and that’s how I
started broadcasting.
BENJI B 
When was your first pilgrimage to Kingston?
David Rodigan 
January 1979, never ever forget it. The first night I spent in a place called
Edgewater out by Portmore. Every mosquito in the region just said, “We’re
going to have this guy.”
[laughter]
When I woke up the next morning I was covered in mosquito bumps and bites.
This bus came past. It was a bus on the street selling bulla cake, cheese, and
juice. I stood out in this burning sun. I was in Jamaica. The first place I
went to was Channel One, Maxfield Avenue. I saw Earl Zero outside Channel One.
That evening the pilgrimage, Western Kingston, I mean Channel One is in
Maxfield Avenue, Kingston 12. Next region is Kingston 11, Kingston 10, Kingston
13, Trench Town, Bob Marley, Waterhouse, Kind Tubby Studio. I can’t tell you
what it was like to walk up the side and push that gate. It was dark; dogs
were barking. I went into the inner sanctum and there he was, the man who I’d
wanted to meet more than anybody else because he epitomized dub music. As far
as I was concerned, almost single-handedly, I know others did so much for it,
but when he touched the board, it was for me magical. I got to meet the king.
He was so cool. I remember saying to him and Prince Jammy, because Jammy was
his assistant engineer at the time, I said, “I’ve come to cut some dubplates.”
Jammy knew of me. So Tubby said, “Okay. There’s the price. There’s the rates
up on the wall. Let’s start.” He pressed play on the multi-track, a four-
track. This rhythm started and he looked at me. I said, “No, thanks.” He
played another one and he looked at me, Jammy just looked at the floor.
Tubby’s, “The clock’s running. We’re going to cut dub. What are you going to
do?” I said, “No, I don’t like that one.” He played another one. I said, “No,
I don’t like that one either.” He looked at Jammy and they both slightly
smiled. I didn’t get it at the time. So Tubby leaned back and took these keys
out and he threw it to this young lad and said, “Open that cupboard.” This
multi-track came out. Tubby reeled it up and pressed play. This is what I
heard. I said to him, “Yes. Yeah. I want to cut that.” I said, “Who’s it by?”
He said, “It’s a new singer produced by Yabby You, Vivian Jackson. The
singer’s name is Michael Hanes, but they’re calling him Michael Prophet.” I
said, “Can I cut that?” He said, “Yes.” I got my money out. This is the
original dubplate which has only left my house on two occasions until tonight.
From 1979 it’s a King Tubby original dubplate master. He was very fastidious
about sleeves and artwork. I’ve got him to sign it. This, if I may, is the
dub. He cut it straight away. In those days the dub was cut. Dub came about
because DJs in sound systems were so obsessed with the music that they wanted
things that no one else had. They drove these things forward. We, the DJs,
with all due respect to the musicians, we drove this thing forward because we
wanted stuff that no one else had because we were so obsessed with the music.
The engineers had to find ways of satisfying our demand for music. A four-track, the plate cut as it played. He mixed on the four-track. This is a
photograph of him actually at his control tower, at the board. That’s one of
the first ever King Tubby dub albums. It is legendary. It’s him and Jammy and
he mixed it. You can hear the counting.
(music: Michael Prophet – King Tubby dubplate)
You can hear already that he’s giving me a different mix to the one that would
come out because he’s mixing it from the four-track. As it came to the end of
the vocal, of course, he would just simply scroll, rewind the tape, and then
begin again. There was no hesitation; you automatically cut a dub of the
vocal. You had to have a dub so your DJ in the sound system would DJ and chat
over it. Also, you could just play it as an instrumental. It went straight to
the instrumental and it just scrolled like this. He’s cutting live now again.
[music continues]
If I may, Benji, just spin it forward
while I remember because I don’t want to forget. There’s so many things to
remember and so many stories to tell. I can’t tell them all. While they come
to me I’d just like to share them with you. 1985, when I cut another dub with
King Tubby and this is it.
BENJI B 
I don’t know about you, I feel like a little kid right now.
David Rodigan 
He changed his artwork. Let’s pass that around so that people can… please
handle it with great care. It’s a treasured possession. You can see the
attention to detail on his plates and how fastidious he was. He was
meticulous, by the way. There was no smoking in the studio. If he wasn’t there
and people lit up, they would hear him approaching and the place would go,
“He’s coming. He’s coming.” He would walk in, “Somebody’s smoking in here.”
“No, Mr. Tubbs.” It was that diligence. It was a very serious place. It was a
workplace. He created this new sleeve, Waterhouse was also referred to as
Firehouse because there were all sorts of problems in that region. Houses were
burned down and so on. Again, being an avid collector I got him to sign this.
When the music had changed, and some people say that the advent of techno
reggae or digital reggae was the demise of it. There are still people in
Jamaica who say, “Rodigan, you should never have played ‘Sleng Teng’ on the
radio. That was a disgrace to Jamaican music.” I remember Mr. Bradshaw, Sunny
Bradshaw, he approached Barry G and I in the hotel of the Pegasus one evening
and told us point blank, he was a band leader and a leader of the Jamaican
Musicians Union, he said we were a disgrace. We should never have played
“Sleng Teng.” It was deeply offensive to Jamaican musicians. It should never
have been played. “Sleng Teng,” as I’m sure you all know, was the advent of
what we now call digital reggae. The fact that this could be made on a
computer, not by human being. We all know [imitates “Slent Teng” bassline]
“ta-ta-ta-ta,” where it came from, a Casio music box. A boy called Noel Davey
took it to Jammy’s and Jammy cut a dub with Tenor Saw. [sings] “How water
walk go a pumpkin belly / Who asks me dat huh me ole time granny.” And that
was a dubplate that he voiced to go to the country. They tried to revoice it
and they couldn’t. So what came out was, [imitates bassline]”ta-ta-ta-ta,”
that was Jammy’s. Over at Tubby’s there was a counteraction, if you’d like.
Tubby’s found some musicians called the Firehouse Crew, a young Christian
group, who were experimenting with synthesizers. Remember, this is a long time
ago. So this was one of the first examples of techno or digital, computerized
reggae, as they called it. If you think “Sleng Teng” was big, this was big
too. This is by Anthony Red Rose. The song is called “Tempo.” When I was
cutting the dub in ’85, I said to Tubby, “Tubby, can you put the tone button
on the front of the dub?” Because you have that tone button echoed by Tubby,
you knew that was a Tubby dub. Him and Fatman, the assistant engineer, he
said, “You mean this, like this?” He pressed the tone button, Tubby’s tone
button on my dub.
(music: Anthony Red Rose – “Tempo (King Tubby dubplate)”)
“It sounds sweeter with an echo
chamber / Don’t you know we are the danger. Tempo.” When this tune played in
Western Kingston, I can’t describe the feeling when you heard this playing
from a sound system, never mind on the radio. Then, of course, the vocal came
to an end and he looked at me as if to say… I said, “Yeah, of course, the
dub.” They mixed this dub of the vocal. And for me, this was digital music at
its finest.
(music: Anthony Red Rose – “Tempo Dub (King Tubby dubplate)”)
[comments over music] Just while we’re
on this subject, I think my last picture, penultimate picture is of this man,
Augustus Pablo, because something very significant happened when he met King
Tubby. They created that album called King Tubby Meets Rockers Uptown, which
I’m sure, everyone will remember. It epitomized what this music was about for
so many of us, the fact that you could have dub created in this way. I don’t
need to play that instrumental, I’m sure. Everyone knows it. If I may just
play two more examples of how a dubplate can come. I was at a dance in the Q
Club in Paddington one night and Jah Screw rushed in and said, “I just voiced
this. Play it.” When a producer comes to you with that look in his eye, you
just play it.
(music: Jah Screw – “Here I Come (Broader Than Broadway) dubplate”)
Drum & bass dubplate cutting instrumental music,
drum & bass music, echo chamber music, rapping. The whole concept of someone
talking in time over a rhythm, as far as I was concerned, had origins to a
degree in American music, yes, but really the daddy for the mould were the
Jamaican DJs like King Stitt, Count Machuki, and this man who was so revered
by 1974, ’75, ’76 that I swear to god he could have run for prime minister in
Jamaica, Big Youth. This album Screaming Target was truly legendary. I think
what epitomized what he did was this track I’m going to play now which is
called “Waterhouse Rock” and it’s over a Joe Gibbs rhythm. He used to DJ live
on the sound systems before he started making records. And this kind of sums
him up.
(music: Big Youth – “Waterhouse Rock” dubplate)
[comments over music] Are you ready for the breakdown? Here it comes.
[holds up record sleeve] I love the puffy he is leaning on in his front
room. He used to DJ for us a sound called Tipatone. When Tipatone’s strung up
you better back off, or King Tubby’s strung up, ‘cause all these, like U-Roy,
I-Roy, U-Roy is the DJ for Dickies Dynamic before he came over to King
Tubby’s, they learned their craft by entertaining crowds live. If you can’t
bust a dance in Jamaica on the mic in front of an audience, then forget it,
you’re not going to the studio.
[music continues]
One last image. When I received the MBE, a dear friend of mine, Noel Hawkes,
sent me something in the post. I couldn’t believe that someone kept this for
so long. It’s my first ever public engagement as a radio DJ playing in the
club. It was in High Wycombe in 1979, Radio London Capital Radio David
Rodigan, [they spelled it] “Rudigan.” I mean, how priceless is that? “Tribal
hot 100,” me? No. That was my first ever gig and I thank Noel Hawkes for that.
I’m sorry if that link was too long, Benji, but they were just some stories I
needed to tell.
BENJI B 
Listen, there is no one that’s complaining in here right now.
[cheers / applause]
We just want to keep going. In those early years of visiting these legendary
studios, I think before we leave that period because it’s such a magical
period in the music, maybe you should talk about some other early interactions
with artists like Sir ‘Coxsone’ Dodd and the legendary Studio One. I also want
to talk about the first time that you got to meet Robert Nesta Marley as well,
and also, of course Osbourne Roddick [AKA King Tubby] and people like that.
Maybe we should talk a little bit about that before we move away from that
era.
David Rodigan 
I was very fortunate in going to Jamaica in those early times, late ’70s,
early ’80s because it was such an exciting period in the music. I would say
with all due respect to modern music, that some of the things that are missing
from it is the identification created by analog recordings. The fact that
music is now homogenized in such a way that it’s almost impossible to discover
where Junior Gong voiced his latest tune ‘cause it could have been anywhere.
But in those days, because it was analog and because musicians gathered
together, “One, two, one,” and there was a sound that came from each studio so
you knew, if you studied it enough, you’d figured out that was Duke Reid or
that’s Coxsone, that’s Channel One, that’s Harry J, that’s Sylvan Morris
engineering that. That’s Lee Perry when he build the Black Ark before he
changed it up because you were slightly obsessive you would know those things.
Obviously, hundreds and hundreds of thousands of collectors did. For me, to go
to Harry J and meet Sylvan Morris who had been the pioneer for so much music
when he was the resident engineer at Studio One, to go to Studio One and meet
Coxsone Dodd when he was engineering himself. Bob Marley was lying in state
and we were there listening to some old Bob Marley tracks. And Lone Ranger was
voicing, “This a tribute to Bob Marley.” Bob Marley was lying in state, just
half a mile up the road at the National Arena. I do consider myself to be very
fortunate and very privileged to meet so many of these people, to meet Bunny
Wailer coming out of Harry J’s studio and getting into his old Land Rover
jeep. “There he is, Bunny Wailer,” you know? When you’re a fan, meeting the
people that make the music is just so special. To climb the stairs at Treasure
Isle, up those wooden stairs, that staircase, knowing that back in the day the
liquor store was downstairs, Duke Reid had the speaker, so he would listen to
what Tommy McCook was doing upstairs. If he didn’t like the sound of the
rhythms, he’d sometimes come up there and famously let off a couple of shots
in the wall to encourage the musicians. [laughs] This is fact. These things
happened. I walked into the studio, “This one will inform, educate, and
inspire.” Mikey Dread was voicing “Stepping Out Of Babylon,” and Marcia
Griffiths is watching him, and Errol Brown was the engineer and I’m in the
room. You just can’t believe that you’ve been given that privilege. I was
given that privilege. I’m extremely grateful. The first time I ever met Bob Marley was, I saw him in a pub on Fulham Palace Road. That’s why when young
bands say, “Oh, I can’t be doing with this touring.” I say, “You can’t be
doing with the touring? Bob Marley and the Wailers performed in a pub called
The Greyhound on Fulham Palace Road for next to nothing.” When the show was
over, there was hardly any talking. They just performed and they blew the
place apart. I was walking down Fulham Palace Road thinking, this is 1973, the
Burning album had just come out, “At last I’ve seen Bob Marley.” And this
enormous cloud of smoke came out of the shop doorway. I thought that shop was
on fire. [laughs] When the smoke cleared there was Bob Marley on the end of
a spliff, like 200 yards down the road from the Greyhound Pub with ‘Wire’
Lindo leaning on his guitar. You don’t get moments like that very often in
life. I rushed up and gushed, “Since the days of ‘What’s New Pussycat,’ ‘One
Love,’ ‘Simmer Down,’ I’m so glad to have met you.” He smiled and shook my
hand. Next thing, this car screeched up. He said, “I’ve got to go.” Him and
‘Wire’ Lindo got into the car, the car pulled off down Fulham Palace Road and
I stood there. He turned around and waved out the back window of the car to
me. I mean, can you imagine what that’s like as a fan? That’s just amazing.
Years later he was returning from Zimbabwe. If you haven’t seen the film, go
and see the film Marley, two and a half hours. It’s like ten minutes. It’s
priceless. I’m so glad I saw it in the cinema, but get it on DVD. I actually
heard a clip of myself in the movie asking him a question because in 1980 he
came back from Zimbabwe having performed for the independence celebrations and
he was on a stopover unannounced in London. It was a Friday afternoon at
Island Records and I was going up the stairs and he was coming down the
stairs. I seized the moment. I just said, “Bob Marley, can you come to our
radio show tomorrow night, please?” He looked at a couple of rasta elders and
they nodded their agreement. A couple of managers looking like I shouldn’t
have done this, and he came on the show. Before that, he said to me, “Do you
want to come upstairs and listen to a new song I’ve just recorded?” I went
upstairs. I was in the listening room at Island Records with Aston ‘Family
Man’ Barrett and Bob Marley. He played this song from a cassette. At the end
of the song he asked me what I thought. To be sitting in a room with Bob
Marley, he’s asking your opinion on a song that he’s just recorded. I’ll have
to play it, hang on. On a song that he’s just finished recording. I can’t
really tell you how special that was. He said, “Okay. If you like it, if you
like the mix,” which I did, he said, “I’ll play it for you tomorrow night.” He
brought the tape to Capital Radio the following night. This is the song.
(music: Bob Marley – “Could You Be Loved”)
How special is that? To be in the studio on Capital Radio live and the last
track of an hour interview was that.
[applause]
So, I’ve been very fortunate, incredibly fortunate to have visited the island
so many times, to have met so many people. I actually watched Captain Sinbad
voicing “51 Storm” with Little John, Jammy’s engineer. I mean, I could go on
and on about instances. I’ve just been very fortunate to have been in the
right place at the right time on more than one occasion.
BENJI B 
Tell us about the very first time you were on the radio in Jamaica.
David Rodigan 
That was 1983 because I’d gone on behalf of Capital Radio to record some
special programs on the island. I invited a number of artists to JBC [Radio].
In fact, the security guard told me when I was leaving. He said, “Rodigan, we
never see so much artists in here at one time.” I had them literally lined up.
It was like a doctor’s surgery. I felt very honored that he’d said that. The
fact that so many of them turned up, Ruddy Thomas, Derrick Harriott, Big
Youth, it was amazing. The number one radio DJ at the time was Barry Gordon,
Barry G the Boogeyman on JBC Radio One. He was a phenomenon, island wide, had
the biggest audiences. No one had audiences like him before. He was a
phenomenon. I asked him to do a report for Capital Radio which he duly did.
He said to me, “I’d like to respond by inviting you to my show on Saturday
night. You can do a report on British reggae.” I turned up at JBC Radio
halfway through that Saturday night. At the end of the news he turned to me
and said, “Let’s do a clash.”
[laughter]
“Ah, thank for the warning, Barry.” So, we did a clash. That was 8:00 pm. We
were still clashing at 2:00 am. It was a six-hour clash. To this day, if you
go to Jamaica and ask anyone about that clash, they’ll tell you about it. It
became an annual event for a number of years. The most famous was referred to
as the “Sleng Teng” clash in ’85. The next day we had a dance down in Belmont,
in Peter Tosh’s town on the south coast. We were driving down through the
hamlets and villages. All we heard was [imitates “Sleng Teng” bassline] “ta-
na-na.” Like it was in a tape delay because those days it was cassette and
tape and many parts of Jamaica did not have television so the radio was
everything. It was the way of communicating. The hills and valleys, [sings] ”Take me over hills and the valleys,” when Luciano says that it was the
truth. I remember being a wise guy, thinking I could drive from Montego Bay to
Mandeville and I would just use a road map to get there. Wrong. Because on the
road map, a B road to me is a B road. In Jamaica it’s a track. I ended up in
Cockpit Country, thinking I’d never ever get there. Over hills and valleys,
the heartland of Jamaica. I was there again at Easter with my wife and we
drove deep into the heartland again, down into Westmoreland, it’s just
paradise. It is beautiful. And, you know, cane cutters at 12 o’clock in the
morning coming from the fields. You ever catch yourself moaning about your
work or your job, and you see what they have to do and the conditions and the
kind of pressure and heat. It’s the ups and the down of Jamaican lifestyle.
I’m lost. I don’t know where I started now. I’m completely lost.
BENJI B 
You were talking about Barry G.
David Rodigan 
Oh yeah, Barry G at the clash. We were driving through the hills and valleys
and down to the south coast. We just heard repeats of the cassettes of the
show the night before. It was a baptism of fire, but we were both passionate
about the music. We both revered the music. It was a joy to clash with him. We
had dinner with our respective wives. We got together at Easter. His wife and
my wife, the four of us, had dinner down in Jamaica. It was just wonderful,
he’s back on top again. He’s got the number one radio show, he’s unstoppable.
He’s come back on Mellow FM and he’s island-wide. He’s Barry Gordon.
BENJI B 
In the years since then, you’ve definitely become recognized as a champion, a
don, a master of the sound clash. If anyone needed any proof, you might have
noticed there’s a sort of Champions League-esque trophy to my right which is
what, David?
David Rodigan 
That’s the World Clash Reset that took place at Easter Saturday night in
Queens in Amazura in front of about 5,000 Jamaicans. There may have been some
Americans in there as well but it was predominantly Jamaicans, certainly sound
clash fanatics. For those of you not familiar with sound clash culture, it’s
again an extension of this whole concept of wanting something that nobody else
has got. They took it to the ultimate dimension when they started sound
systems, started voicing dubs that were not only exclusive mixes in the way
that that King Tubby mix was exclusive, but they had your name called. That
meant you got the artist, not just the engineer, the artist to come to the
studio and revoice his number one tune calling your name. That meant that you
had an exclusive dub. That meant that you could seriously clash any contender.
Sound system clashing started in the 1950s in Jamaica with sound systems like
Duke Reid’s The Trojan, Coxsone’s Downbeat, Prince Buster’s Voice Of The
People, trying to outdo each other with the quality of sound and exclusive
recordings. In those days they weren’t even making records in Jamaica. They
would go to America, they’d buy 7" singles or 78s, bring them back and scratch
the label off. You didn’t know what they were playing. “Coxsone Hop” was
actually “Call Of The Gator” by Willis Jackson but everyone thought it was
“Coxsone Hop.” Already exclusivity was part of Jamaican culture. “I have this,
you don’t know what it’s called, I scratched the label off.” Even in the ‘70s
in Jamaican sound systems in London you’d pick up the record box, it was all
scrubbed out. Just “Dukes” or something simple on there that they’d know what
it was. This whole idea of cutting dubplates was an extension of this idea of
a sound system, an enormous mobile discotheque setting itself up in a village
square in the heartland of Jamaica somewhere and thousands of people coming to
gather around and listen to the sound. The pride that the sound system owner
would take with the sound and the way it sounded and the way it was tuned up,
the box boys, the MCs, the selector, it was a team. The prestigious design of
the speakers and their artwork, it was just the whole sound system culture,
King Tubby’s Hometown Hi-Fi, the Chinese artwork that he created. It was just
part of the whole experience of listening to sound in such a way that it was
so powerful and moving. The fact that they had these metal horns, the kind of
horns you’d see on a station platform, those would be the horns that were
spitting out the treble. The idea of dubplate cutting then developed into
dubplate clashing and having songs that no one else has. There’s been a thing
called World Clash every year in New York for many years. They took a couple
of years out and they did it as a reset this year. I clashed with a number of
sound systems. The idea is that you come up with dubs that are completely
exclusive to you. You have to have what’s known as customized dubs. You have
to have some songs that are made only for that night, that can only be played
that night and at no other time. One of the biggest forwards I got for the
night was a dub by Ninja Man who had been in jail for three years on remand
without charge. He finally got bail after three years and one month. I managed
to speak to him the day he got bail. I said, “Do you want to voice?” He said,
“Tell me where. Tell me when.” The next morning at 9:00 am he was voicing this
dub. It was customized as I’d requested. There are a couple of offensive words
in there but you have to bear with me. It was customized for the clash. When
it’s customized it must name all your competitors. It must say what you’re
going to do to them. If it doesn’t, it’s of no consequence. On the night in
Amazura I drew for this in the second round and the forward was phenomenal. A,
they couldn’t believe I’d gotten Ninja Man because he’d just come out of jail.
The intro alone tells you he’s just come out of jail as you’re about to hear.
Then he goes on to name the sounds that will die that night as a result of
this customized dub. Bear with me. The great thing was that I could actually
hear him voicing it because the people that I worked with, Henry Lewis down in
Jamaica, he had his mobile phone on. He was on the other side of the board
while Ninja Man was voicing. I could hear him voicing the dub. He did it in
one take, one take, had been in jail for three years and one month, came out
of jail the following morning and voiced this. He used a very famous hit of
his called “Border Clash.” I’ll just cue it up. You’ll hear what he did. You
can imagine the forward it got when you’ll hear it now.
(music: Ninja Man – “Border Clash (Rodigan dubplate)”)
[music stops] This is the World Clash. That was Ninja Man and that was, as
you can imagine, a very exciting moment in the dance. I’d just like to play
one other example of something that I would typically do. The idea is to have
customized dubs but I always try to come with humor and a little twist. I
would always try to think of something different and use announcements, a sort
of bizarre scenario, a court room appearance by a judge and prosecutor,
various scenarios that I’ve used over the years. I got the idea of a spoof
that I could use for World Clash. This is it. I’m not going to introduce it
because hopefully it will be self-explanatory. There were a lot of surprised
faces in the audience that night.
BENJI B 
This is from New York, right?
David Rodigan 
This is from the World Clash in New York on Easter Saturday.
(music: Omar – “Dead Men Walking (Rodigan dubplate)” / applause)
BENJI B 
We want to just get so much information about clash from you because there
have been so many legendary moments that I want to personally ask you about.
But you raised something interesting there about context and where you’re
actually playing at the time because obviously that’s a reference to The
Wire and you’re in New York. I want to ask you about two famous dubplates
that I remember hearing about. One being the “Who Wants to Be a Millionaire”
dubplate from, I think that was around 2002 or something.
David Rodigan 
Yeah.
BENJI B 
I remember it was at Ocean in Hackney, I think. It was like you versus Mighty
Crown, Matternhorn. Tell us about the Chris Tarrant dubplate.
David Rodigan 
Again, I just got the idea that I could do Who Wants to Be a Millionaire and
use my opponents as the contestants. They had to come on stage and answer the
questions and they could phone a friend. I think it was in Nottingham. It was
UK Cup Clash. When the music started and Chris Tarrant started, the place just
went crazy. No one could believe it. The problem was that Mighty Crown didn’t
know what the hell it was all about because Who Wants to Be a Millionaire
had not hit Japan. They kind of stood there like, “Yeah, what?” Meanwhile the
place is going bonkers. I didn’t win but people still talk about that night
and that moment. I always remember Chris Tarrant afterwards. He sent me a
message and said, “I don’t know what the hell that was about but I hope it
works for you love. God bless you, Chris Tarrant.” He did it with great vim
and enthusiasm.
BENJI B 
Amazing. Another dub I wanted to ask you about was the very famous Wyclef
“Maria Maria” dub when he brought it to you personally.
David Rodigan 
That was an amazing night. In 1999 World Clash, once again Amazura, New York,
thousands of people. I remember because I’d done a gig in Boston that night,
the following morning I was taking a coffee at the airport. My agent rushed up
to me. He said, “You’ll never guess who won World Clash last night.” I said,
“Jaro, Bass Odyssey?” He said, “No, Mighty Crown.” I said, “Are you serious?”
He said, “Yeah, those Japanese kids. They won it.” They did. They absolutely
annihilated all the competition because they’d actually been collecting dubs
for years off and under the radar, again, like fanatics all over the world,
like sound boys in Rome, in Berlin, in Zürich, all over the world, LA. They
collected these dubs for years and had never played them. No one knew. They
turned up. “Who are they? Mighty who? Who are these guys?” They just blew
everyone out. There were all the Jamaican sounds dead in the water. That was
November. The agency said, “We want to do a clash with you and them.” All my
mates said, “No, you’re crazy. They’ll kill you. Don’t do it. You’re mad.” I
said, “That’s exactly what I need to hear so I’ll do it.” It was in Hartford,
Connecticut. It was an absolute road block. I’ll never forget it. It was
ridiculous. In the heat of the clash Mighty Crown were hyped, they were world
champions, unstoppable. Second, fourth or fifth round, I looked to the wings,
I couldn’t believe my eyes. Beast, the bodyguard of Wyclef Jean was standing
in the wings. He just went, [signals “Come here.”] Mighty Crown were playing so I
walked over. I said, “What’s going on, Beast?” He took me off the side of the
stage and drew this curtain. There was Wyclef in a big beaver hat and a big
long coat, a false fur coat. I said, “Wyclef, what are you doing here?” He
said, “How are you?” I said, “I’m fine. Great to see you.” He said, “Do you
know what the number one record is in America?” I said, “I’ve got no idea.” He
said, “It’s called ‘Maria Maria.’ It’s by G&B The Product and me and
Carlos Santana.” I said, “Congratulations. Great. Terrific. Well done.”
Because I didn’t know, I’d just landed. Typical of me, of course. Sometimes my
radar doesn’t pick these things up. He said, “Yeah.” Then he opened the coat
and he handed me the dubplate. He said, “That’s the plate to kill Mighty
Crown. Play the second track.”
[laughter]
That’s the first time in my life that I’d ever played a dub blind. You always
want to listen to a dub. This is slightly edited because obviously I don’t
want to keep mentioning Mighty Crown in it. He said, “Just play it.” I went
back onto the stage, it was my round. I pressed play on the dubplate. In
reggae sound system culture you’ll hear people talk about “deep forward.”
You’ve got forward in the dance, you’ve got a forward from the crowd. If you
ever get a deep forward, it comes from the back because the real heads don’t
stand at the front. They stand at the back. As Gregory Isaacs once said to me,
“Rodigan, always stand near the exit because you never know what’s going to
happen.”
[laughter]
The real heads don’t want to be seen to be desperate to see or watch anything.
May I just say, ladies and gentlemen, John Masouri. He’s sitting to the right.
He’s a pioneer for this music as a journalist. Would you please salute John
Masouri.
[applause]
Thank you, John, for all you’ve done for the music as a journalist. Thank you.
It was just one of those moments. The forward came from the back and it just
spread like a tidal wave. I’ll never ever forget it. By the way now, Simon and
Sami from Mighty Crown they’re very good friends of mine. We’re very close
friends now. We didn’t know each other then. We’d hardly spoken. I saw the
look on their faces when this thing played. Well, it was over. I’d defeated
the world champions. It was really because of this.
(music: Santana feat. The product G&B – “Maria Maria (Rodigan dubplate)” /
applause)
Once again, thank you to Mighty Crown who took that on the chin in such a
sporting way. I salute them for all they’ve done for the music. Obviously, I
edited out the bit where it mentions their execution. With all due respect,
they are fans of the music just as we all are here tonight.
BENJI B 
Do you ever get nervous before a clash now?
David Rodigan 
Yes, of course. Incredibly nervous. There is nothing more nerve-wracking,
apart from getting an MBE. I can assure you that was even more nerve-wracking
than sound clashing because you’re going into the game and it’s very long. It
starts at 11:00 midnight and it goes on ’till 5:00 am, five hours. You have to
listen to every single dub that’s played. If you ever repeat anything that’s
already been played, you’re immediately disqualified. You must play
everything, it must have you name in it or it doesn’t count. You can be
disqualified for that. You must be aware of what the competition is playing.
An example of that is the clash with Bass Odyssey was what they call a “one
for one” because as the evening progresses sounds are eliminated by public
voting. I was in the one for one and it was the best of ten. I was three/nil
down. Bass Odyssey are the iron fist of Jamaica. They’re one of the hardest
sounds in the world to defeat. They’re almost unstoppable despite the fact
that Squingy is no longer with them because he passed away. They are a feared
sound. I was three/nil down in New York and New York’s their town. I just
thought, “What am I going to do?” Fortunately, I managed to pull back and pull
back. When I actually got back we were at five/five. Whoever scored the next
plate won. I played… Shall I play the dubplate? I wasn’t going to play it but
I will.
BENJI B 
Is that a real question?
David Rodigan 
I will. This is it. Big up Liverpool. You’ll know why when you hear it in just
a second, big up Ken Dodd. This was voiced and you’ll know the time it was
voiced from the intro and a band from Liverpool.
(music: Bob Andy – Rodigan dubplate)
That was my sixth tune and the forward was absolutely amazing. Thanks to Bob
Andy, Janice from I-Anka Records is in the house tonight. Janice, so lovely to
see you. Excuse me handpicking people like this, but Janice for all that
you’ve done for Bob in his career, we love you and we thank you from the
bottom of our hearts. Bob alone, I know. Untiring for years you’ve championed
his fight, his rights, for his music, his publishing. We love you. We salute
you for all you’ve done for Bob Andy. Ladies and gentlemen, please give a
round of applause to Janice from I-Anka.
[applause]
I played a couple of Bob Andy dubs early ‘round and they went down so well. I
was so pleased. When I played that I wondered what they were going to come up
with next. I couldn’t believe it. The place exploded. They played back a tune
that I’d already played by Garnett Silk. You cannot play back a tune in a
clash. That’s the worst thing you can do. Bass Oddysey couldn’t believe that
they’d done it either but they did. With all due respect to Worm and Damion it
was just one of those moments. The pressure was on. You choose a tune. Maybe
they cued up the wrong tune, I don’t know. That was it. That was the moment in
which I won the clash because I got that point. It was the best of ten. That’s
how razor edge and sharp it can be in dubplate clashing. Imagine you were
there all night and everything you cut must be unique to you. It’s very
challenging but very exciting.
BENJI B 
Am I right in thinking that in the days before dubplate specials you could
actually draw for an artist to come and play for you?
David Rodigan 
You could, yeah. That was true. That was amazing when that used to happen.
That really was the days before cutting a dub with your name in, really. For
me, one of the great highlights was a clash I did in… I’ve got to play the
dub, sorry. It was a clash in New York. It was in December 1985. The snow was
falling. The crowd was four deep around the Brooklyn Empire. When we arrived I
said to the driver, I said, “What’s all this? Is it some sort of concert?”
They said, “It’s for you.” We couldn’t believe it. There were thousands of
people in the Brooklyn Empire. Why? Because Barry G and I had been doing these
clashes on the radio. These cassettes had gone up to New York so they all
wanted to come and see what we looked like. One of the dubs I’d cut that night
for that clash was this. Also that night performing on stage were people like
Tiger, Chaka Demus & Pliers, new artists that you could draw from live and
direct. This was a dub by someone who’s no longer with us. Again, in terms of
classic dubs that you’ll never forget. This Tenor Saw just blew the place
apart.
(music: Tenor Saw - Rodigan dubplate)
[comments over music] A very diplomatic dub because he doesn’t actually diss
Barry G because he wanted his records played on Jamaican Radio. It did tear
down the house. That wasn’t a live appearance but that night some artists did
perform, if you’d like, live for me and for Barry. One I will never ever
forget was 1985 at Walter Fletcher beach. We couldn’t believe the crowds up in
Montego Bay when we arrived. Remember, we’re just two radio DJs. There were
thousands of people on the beach at Walter Fletcher. I’m trying to get in with
Barry with a security. I felt this thug on my shirt. I turned. I couldn’t
believe my eyes. Because he was standing there, Augustus Pablo. To tell you I
hero worship this man is an understatement. I believe that this album, the
first solo album, and the subsequent albums, particularly King Tubby Meets
The Rockers Uptown were definitive in creating a genre of music that was
referred to the “Far East” sound, haunting instrumental recordings which in
many ways led the way, I believe, for so much electronic dub music that we now
know, bass culture, drum & bass. Big up, Goldie in the house. Give me a
signal for Goldie.
[applause]
Shy FX’s granddad is the great Count Shelley. Shy’s in the house, digital
sound boy.
[applause]
I said, “Pablo.” He was incognito. I said, “Pablo, what are you doing here?”
He just let me glimpse at the melodica. I said, “What?” He said, “I’ve come to
play for you.” In a clash with Barry Gordon. I will never forget that night as
long as I live. On the beach, Montego Bay, the sea rolling in, the wave
crashing, moonlight beaming down and we’re playing dub for dub. I lined up a
7" “Real Rock,” The Sound Dimension. I said, “Ladies and gentlemen, I’m
drawing for an artist in a one for one clash tonight. I’m drawing for Augustus
Pablo.” We were performing in this beach hut. Everyone was outside. There were
literally people hanging from the rafters of this thing. I don’t know how it
didn’t fall down on top of all of us. When I cued up the 7" he took out the
melodica. The place exploded. Imagine Augustus Pablo playing live for you in a
clash on “Real Rock.” It was phenomenal.
BENJI B 
Can you play that record?
David Rodigan 
I don’t have it because it was live.
BENJI B 
I mean the Rockers.
David Rodigan 
Absolutely, why not? Hang on a second. I’ll cue it.
BENJI B 
Wasn’t it nerve-wracking when you first had to clash in Kingston? How did that
feel?
David Rodigan 
The first clash I ever did in Kingston was at the New Kingston drive-in
cinema. I walked onto the stage. I was so nervous, I was shaking. Barry G
introduced me. There were thousands of people there. There was this stunning
deafening silence when I walked onto the stage because they’d all thought I
was black. [laughs] You can imagine, I’d been on the radio so they presumed
I was a black Londoner. It was a deafening silence. Barry G just said, “Play a
tune.” I did. This is one of the Augustus Pablo tracks that I’ve always
revered. This is “Cassava Piece.”
(music: Augustus Pablo – “Cassava Piece”)
In case you’re wondering why it’s called ‘Ram Jam Presents,’ I’d just like to
remind myself and you of why. In 1967 on Radio Caroline Tommy Vance played a
song every day, rocking on that boat out in the North Sea. It was called “Ram
Jam” by Jackie Mittoo. I love that haunting instrumental so much I could not
stop playing it. My friends at school started to call me ‘Ram Jam.’ That’s
where the nickname came from, ‘Ram Jam’ Rodigan. Then in the early ’70s when I
was unemployed, I started selling records in a street market in Putney and
another street market in Oxford. I called my record shack Ram Jam’s Record
Shack. I was getting high on my own supply. I was so addicted to this music, I
couldn’t stand to think that I wouldn’t be able to keep up with it. If I could
sell it, that meant I could buy it at wholesale price and keep this stuff.
That was an excuse. But here’s another example of a haunting song from the
summer of ’76 by Augustus Pablo that I sold on that record market place in
1976. This is “East of the River Nile” by Augustus Pablo. Again if this
doesn’t preempt what was coming in years to come, then nothing does. Drum
& bass, dubstep, thank you to all the dubstep pioneers who welcomed me
into their world and giving me the privilege to play in places like this when
normally I wouldn’t have normally played. Thank you to the dubstep world for
that invitation. I know James Breakage is here tonight and Caspa. Thank you.
“East of the River Nile,” Augustus Pablo. Listen to this.
(music: Augustus Pablo – “East of the River Nile”)
What I l used to love about the music, Benji, was going to listen to sound
systems in England, the great Jah Shaka, Coxsone, Fat Man, the legendary sound
systems in Dalston, the Four Aces club, the All Nations club in Hackney in
London Fields which is now just a block of flats. Gossips in Dean Street, the
old Q Club in Paddington where the American soldiers used to come up from the
base and model and pose off and we didn’t care ‘cause we still played our
reggae when they wanted to hear American 45s. And all those great sound system
selectors, the great Count Suckle because the joy, really, was listening to
this music being played on sound systems. And each sound, Saxon and so on,
individually cueing up and toning and tuning the sound systems so that you
would hear a song like that. It would sound ten times better than it just did.
BENJI B 
Talking about England and your acceptance in Kingston and Jamaica, obviously
reggae music, arguably more than many other music styles is uniquely linked to
one country and one culture. How did you overcome that obstacle if it was one,
of clearly being from a different country and continent and a different
culture?
David Rodigan 
Actually, I didn’t have to overcome it. It was overcome for me because the
love I received from Jamaicans in Jamaica is something to behold. I’ve said
this many many times. The one thing that Jamaicans love is the truth. Point
blank, a Jamaican will tell you to your face what he thinks of you, or what
she thinks of you and they don’t care. Speak the truth, calls it what it will.
The one thing they do like is passion. Anyone who’s passionate about anything,
whether it’s cricket, football, horse racing, live from Newmarket in a
Kingston race track, culture, arts, dance, literature, film, they are
passionate people. I hope that doesn’t sound patronizing because I can assure
you it isn’t. If you’re good at what you do and you care about what you do,
then they will respect you. I think that more than anything else, they showed
me so much love because I was not a Jamaican. I’m not a Jamaican. I was a
visitor to their island, to their country. I was playing their music. I was
championing it on the radio. I’ve had numerous, from Dennis Brown to Prince
Buster, Bob Marley, many artists, and common people from everyday walks of
life who thanked me for what I’ve done for the music. All I’ve done is shared
it. I’ve had to good fortune and privilege to share it as a broadcaster on the
radio. But I’ve had nothing but love from Jamaicans.
[applause]
BENJI B 
Before we leave the subject of sound clashing, I just wanted to ask you in
terms of the next generation coming through, what chance do they have, really,
when they’re clashing someone like yourself that’s playing dubs from artists
that aren’t even around anymore?
David Rodigan 
I would respectfully suggest that in future sound clashes there should be a
ruling in order to encourage new sound systems, that no old dubs can be
played, or certainly, dubs by deceased artists. I think if the promoters were
to introduce that so that no dub by a deceased artist can be played, that
would allow young fresh musicians, selectors, and DJs to come with original
ideas and concepts that could be played, particularly in a one for one.
Because I think they’re at a terrible disadvantage. They cannot cut Dennis
Brown, there are so many people they can’t voice, Nicodemus, because the
artists have passed away. It’s really unfair.
BENJI B 
How much of clash is music and how much importance is it mic?
David Rodigan 
Very good question. It’s both. I think a master of clash culture was Squingy.
If you ever saw Squingy with Bass Odyssey on stage, it was phenomenal. He had
this charisma, that’s the only way I can describe it, when he opened his mouth
and started speaking. You could have played the best dub in the world, but if
Squingy decided that he didn’t like the dub and he’d finished talking about
why he didn’t like it, even you started to think, “Maybe it wasn’t such a good
dub after all.” That was his skill. Somebody like Ricky Trooper, an inspired
selector, sometimes he gets a bit off-key as we all know, famous youtube, put
it on youtube speech is another story altogether. It is about what you’ve got
to say and how you say it as much as what’s being played. I’ve always believed
that the DJ is the last in the food chain because without the engineers, the
song writers, the musicians, the DJs are nothing, we don’t have anything to
play and nothing to do. We’re totally dependent upon all those that come
before us in the process of making the music. I believe that we are duty-bound
almost to unveil the sculpture, the piece of art, before we play it with
respect and address it accordingly. That’s the way I’ve always approached
clash culture. Other selectors perhaps wouldn’t agree with that. They will try
and inhibit you and intimidate you by making comments about you or your sex
life or whatever in order to intimidate you. That’s another aspect of clash
culture.
BENJI B 
You’ve always managed to use humor in your sort of performing history and your
clashes as well. You’ve got to tell the Elvis versus Ninja Man story.
David Rodigan 
The Elvis versus Ninjaman. A few years ago, I think it was 2007 in New York,
they decided that they would do a, what’s the term, personality clash or
something. They had world clash with the sound systems, then afterwards they
had Tony Matterhorn versus Beenie Man and me versus Ninja Man. Anyone familiar
with the music will know that Ninja Man is outrageous. He’s killed how many
people in one for one’s and clashes and so on. I decided I was going to come
dressed as a ninja but then I thought he’ll probably do that. He decided that
he would get dressed in the best suit because I always wore suits in clashes
in America. He got all suited up. The point was that I didn’t know what he was
going to wear and he didn’t know what I was going to wear. Part of the whole
thing of clash culture is the costume on the night. I just thought, “You know
what? I’m going to come as Elvis.” It was decided on a train, a bullet train
to Tokyo with Mighty Crown. Because I saw someone watching a laptop. The guide
in the TV show had an Elvis hairdo. It was a completely over-the-top Elvis
hairdo. He wasn’t being Elvis but he had an Elvis hairdo. Earlier on in the
restaurant, before we got on the plane I’d heard, “We’re caught in a trap, I
can’t get out, because I love you too much baby.” “Suspicious Minds.” I
thought, “‘Suspicious Minds,’ Elvis. I’ve got to be Elvis.” Then I decided I
would voice a dub as Elvis. I revoiced, “You’re caught in a trap,” “Suspicious
Minds.” I voiced it as, “Ninja, you’re caught in a trap, you can’t get out,
‘cause Rodigan will kill you baby.” I waited in the wings until he’d done his
first round. I got an announcer on a dubplate, an actor to say, “Ladies and
gentlemen, I’m terribly sorry but David Rodigan is unable to appear tonight
because he’s not available but he has sent a substitute from Las Vegas.” I
played the substitute selected dubplate from Half Pint and I ran on as Elvis
with the whole silver white suit with the red bandana, the hair, the makeup.
In fact, my driver who picked me up, it was an old buddy of mine in New York.
When he knocked on the hotel room, he said, “Oh sorry, wrong room,” and walked
down the corridor. I said, “No, it really is me. I’m Elvis.” He said, “Are you
crazy?” When I was outside, trying to get in, the security wouldn’t let me in
through the back door because he thought I was some freak standing outside in
November, freezing my nuts off, dressed as Elvis in a satin white suit with
red bandana. It was ridiculous. But I did win the clash. Thank you.
[applause]
BENJI B 
It’s absolutely clear that your enthusiasm for the music and the culture and
DJing in particular has not faded one bit. I just wondered what’s the secret
to that?
David Rodigan 
Forever young. Ken Dodd famously said, “Retirement is for people who never
enjoyed what they were doing and want to start to enjoy what they’re about to
do,” or words to that effect. In other words, so many people have to do jobs
that they don’t enjoy. A famous person once said, “If you do something you
really enjoy, you’ll never work again.” I’ve always enjoyed, Benji, playing
music to people. Again, I repeat myself, I know I’m privileged to do so
because there are literally hundreds of thousands of people that would like to
do that as well. Whether it’s playing in the local pub in the village or
whether it’s playing in front of 50,000 people in Tokyo, it’s all from the
same point of view, of wanting to share music. In recent times, thanks to the
dubstep fraternity, I’ve been welcomed into a world that I probably would
never have been welcomed into, had James Breakage and Caspa not decided to
record my voice on their recordings. For that I’m grateful, very grateful, to
them because it’s allowed me to play to a young audience who have been so
enthusiastic in their response to songs that are special to me, that they’ve
regenerated my batteries. At my age I still get a big buzz out of playing in
the main room here at Fabric and watching the place go bananas when I play,
[sings] “Dubplates playing in the ghetto tonight,” or whatever, or a dubstep
tune from Caspa. I’ve been very very fortunate. That’s what keeps me going.
That’s what keeps me young. Age is nothing but a number. It’s so so true. I
use Ken Dodd as an example because the man is awesome. I think he’s 85 or 86.
Go to his website. It’s as cheap as chips, god bless him. I think hiss nephew
must have knocked it out, 12-years-old. But he’s still working. As he said,
“Don’t use the R word. Don’t tell me about retirement because retirement’s for
people who are fed up of doing what they’re doing and now want to start doing
what they really want to do,” or words to that effect. I still want to keep on
doing this. Tomorrow I’m on a plane to Berlin, playing in Berlin tomorrow
night, Saturday night I’m in Erfurt, about two hours away from Berlin. Monday
night I’m playing in Zürich and Sunday night I’m playing in Biel. That’s four
nights straight playing in different countries, Switzerland, Germany. Last
weekend I was in Rome and Venice, Friday and Saturday. I’m just using those as
examples of places that I’m playing to international audiences. People from
different countries, many of whom can’t even speak really good English
sometimes, but they feel the feel, the flavor, and the passion. I defy anyone
not to listen to “Piece of Mind” by Bob Andy. If that doesn’t want to make you
cry, then you don’t have a soul. Bob Andy’s “Piece of Mind” for me is almost
like a psalm, a psalm of David. The work of Bob Andy has been an inspiration
to me over the years because in those two minutes and forty seconds you can
find the joy for living and a reason for living. I frequently play at
festivals “Could You Be Loved,” yes, “Is This Love” by Bob Marley because that
song is a song of hope for two people, “We’ll share in my bed, we’ll share
this bed together, just the two of us, we’ll live just the two of us.” Because
ultimately there’s so much hate in the world, there’s so much anger. We’re
living in a more violent world, young people hating on each other when they
could be loving each other, not sharing anything, zoned off, ganged off,
territories broken down, communities broken down. It breaks my heart. It
breaks all of our hearts because love in the words of Bob Andy and all the
great writers and artists of our times and previous times have always told us
that we can overcome this because of love, if only we could find that love.
Essentially, I believe this music is about love. We’ve had negative press
because some elements of the music have concentrated on aspects of people’s
lives which frankly have got nothing to do with what this music was about.
This music in my opinion was always about justice, rights, love,
understanding, humility, and sharing and helping your brothers and sisters.
Some of the greatest ghetto songs that emulated from those small studios in
Western Kingston were about sharing, loving, repairing the tragedy of a broken
heart. Don’t even start me on Delroy Wilson and the songs that he’s written
and recorded. There have been from such a small island, a small capital city,
and in a small part of that capital city, these songs over the years that have
come forth, Dennis Brown, Gregory Isaacs, so many names that we could list
them all night here and we still wouldn’t get to the end of them. But
essentially, this music and the reason why this music is still so popular is
because it is essentially about love and justice and standing up for people
who have been downtrodden. Not just in the African journey, of course, as
Macka B says in his new album when he describes that journey from Africa to
Jamaica and 500 years. Macka B has made a track about that, he’s talked about
the fact that on the radio and television you’re bombarded with, “Can you make
a claim? Would you like to make a claim?” because of an accident at work, a
car crash, unlawful disengagement from work. He’s done a new recording based
on that. His story is, “I want to make a claim for the loss of my culture and
my name.” When I heard that song I shivered because he describes where this
thing comes from. People who were oppressed for 400 years, if you go and see
as we all have, the beginning of the Bob Marley film starts with the door of
no return, to think that people made that journey and never came back. This
music is born from that. That’s why it’s so important and that’s why it is so
passionate. That’s why I think it has such an effect on people because it is
so soulful.
[applause]
