TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
It is yet again a very distinct honor to welcome a man of truly many, many
hats. Please, everyone, give a warm hand for Mr. Todd Rundgren.
[applause]
Now, there’s the danger of sitting here for eight hours, because we won’t ever
be able to possibly cover everything and anything. And what we’re going to do
first is probably play a little video that he kindly provided, which gives you
a little bit of a very rough overview of a lot of different directions this
could be going, but we’re going to be focusing on only one or two of them. So,
how about... Doing this?
(video: Medley of Todd Rundgren’s productions and his music)
Right. So, any questions at this stage? You get the idea, there’s a plethora
of avenues that we could pursue now and go down. And what to do in such a
case, other than restarting your computer ’cause it’s a little confused. How
about starting at the very beginning? You’re from the Pennsylvania area.
Philly and all of that, right?
Todd Rundgren 
 Yeah, I grew up in the Philadelphia area. There is a distinct musical scene
in the Philadelphia area, but at the time it mostly revolved around a label
called Cameo-Parkway, and most
all of their artists did dance records. They had Chubby Checker, “The Twist,”
of course. And The Orlons, who do “South Street,” and “The Watusi.” And Dee
Dee Sharp, “The Mashed Potatoes.” These were all dances or places to go dance.
It was not particularly deep and my influences, as it turned out, had a lot to
do with a DJ that we had in the Philadelphia area. His name was Jerry
Blavat and he used to play pretty much
exclusively R&B music. [I was] sort of fortunate to live in Philadelphia,
because you’re right on almost the border line of what they would [call] the
Mason-Dixon line, [which] is the southern border of Pennsylvania. It’s
considered to be the boundary between the North and the South. And back in the
’50s, if you lived below that line, and in certain neighborhoods, your
likelihoods of hearing certain music, particularly black music, dropped off
significantly. They called black music “race records” in the South in those
days, and it was kind of segregated. It was only meant to be listened to by
black people. White kids weren’t supposed to listen to it, because it made you
go all “jungle.” They thought that you would become crazy and wild, and a
sexual fiend, or something like that, just by listening to black music. So we
were fortunate to be just above that line. And we had a DJ who was a white DJ,
but he wanted to try to sound black on the air, and he played pretty much
exclusively R&B music. And this is the principal reason why people find a
lot of similarities between me and Daryl Hall, because we all grew up in that
neighborhood and we all listened to that music. I would go into my house, and
my mom would be listening to Patti Page. I’d have to go out of the house to
hear any decent music, but a couple doors away somebody’s got the radio on,
and he’s on there playing The Coasters, or early R&B records and things
like that. And so, between that and between what my parents would allow to be
played in the house, I got a pretty eclectic musical exposure when I was
young.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
You were listening to a bit of classical as well, right?
Todd Rundgren 
Yeah, my father, he was pretty strict about what could be played while he was
in the house. He would only listen to contemporary classical music. Stuff that
was pretty much anywhere from Debussy and Ravel, [from] French Impressionism
onward. And he liked show tunes, he liked soundtracks to musicals, so I would
hear a lot of that. He had a folk music phase he went through, New Christy Minstrels, and so there was a little bit of that in the house. But never would
he allow actual real rock music to permeate the atmosphere. If we wanted to
listen to it, we had to go up in our rooms, where he couldn’t hear it. And
under no circumstances were we to put it on his record player, which he built
himself. It wasn’t a stereo, it was a hi-fi that he built from plans in a
magazine. And I remember one day he caught me playing my only Beatles record,
and he was livid. Well, he was mad at me all the time then. But in the end
that turned out to be a real advantage for me, having exposure to a broader
range of music, whereas a lot of people grew up on Top 20.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
I mean, Ravel is not the worst harmonic education you can get.
Todd Rundgren 
Certainly not, and in some ways, it kind of just totally osmosed into me. It,
without me thinking about it, totally characterized my harmonic sensibility,
listening to that kind of music. As I grew older, getting into jazz, I was a
camp counselor once, when I was about 16, I guess. And there was a college
professor who was also working at the camp, and he kind of took a shine to me
and started exposing his record collection to me, which was substantially
jazz. And so I learned a lot about jazz listening to that. And at one point I
got into electronic music, which in those days was a completely different
process than it is nowadays, it was all tape-based, and occasionally used
things like test equipment to create sounds. You know, there was no such thing
in those days as a synthesizer, per se. There were just these jury-rigged
piles of wires and stuff that people would build experimentally in order to
explore a broader range of sound. And what I learned from listening to
electronic music was that there is a dynamic element in music that has nothing
to do with the notes that you’re playing. Even if you’re just using sounds,
there’s still certain elements of dynamics and tension and things like that
that you’re trying to create in order for it to qualify to be music, as
opposed to noise. So I got into that for a while. It was, you know, a big
phase, I was buying every electronic music record I could find. Most of it was
from Eastern Europe, as it turned out, Hungary, and places like that. Then
when I got a little older, of course, the Beatles changed everything.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
In which sense for you personally?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, they came up with a formula that worked for a much broader range of
musicians. Previous to the Beatles, the model was like the Elvis model. You
find some pretty person, and then you find songs for them, and then you
arrange the songs for them, and you stick them in the studio and they record
them. And they could have, like, this much actual personal musical
sensibility. They didn’t require any. In fact, there’s a famous story about an
early ’60s artist named Fabian. That, essentially, a record company guy was
walking down the street and he saw this handsome young Italian kid sitting on
the stoop, and said, “Can you sing?” He said, “I don’t know. Maybe.” And the
next thing you know, he’s got a hit record, you know? Really, he really
couldn’t sing. He would do this kind of guttural growling most of the time.
But he was handsome, so they put together all the pieces for him. And that was
a model that only worked if you were handsome enough to front the band. And
the whole idea of knowing who anybody else in the band was was kind of
foreign. You only cared about the guy who was up-front. Then the Beatles came
along, and suddenly you knew all four of them. They wrote all their [songs],
well, they didn’t in the beginning, but eventually they came to write all
their own material. And to arrange it themselves, often with the help of their
producer, but it was still pretty much their project, their direction. And
suddenly, this is a completely different model of success. You find a couple
of guys in the neighborhood, you grow your hair, you plunk out a few tunes,
something like that. Even just copy the Beatles, do Beatles covers, that’s
good enough, you know, to get the girls on you. Which was the whole object.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
What was your band called at the time?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, I had a band in high school called Money.
[laughter]
And we essentially did a broad range of covers. A lot of stuff that was on the
radio, and we’d do a Rolling Stones song, and we’d do a Beatles song. But at a
certain point, one of the guys in the band, our lead singer, really got into
the blues. And he became a really good harp player, and so we started learning
blues music. And mixing it in with the rest of our covers. And when I
graduated from high school and everybody in the band went off to do other
things, I kind of arranged to meet up with a drummer friend that I had and we
were gonna maybe try and start a band, but we had no real concrete plans. Left
home on my 18th birthday. I just hated being at home, and felt completely
liberated when I turned 18. So I left home, met up with this guy eventually,
and started living at his parents’ house while we figured out what to do. And
we would take regular trips to the music store in Philadelphia, just to see
whether there was anyone there that we thought we might want to conscript into
the band. Anyway, there was a group that was kind of hot at the time, they
were called Woody’s Truck Stop. And the reason why they were hot was not so
much because of the music they played, but because the lead guitar player in
the band, his name was Alan Miller, and he was like a national figure, because
he grew his hair long and refused to cut it, and his parents refused to make
him cut it, and the school refused to allow him to attend. But he was a
straight-A student. So the judge ordered the school to provide a telephone
line to him at home. And there was a famous picture of him in Time magazine,
of him sitting at his desk with a little speaker phone, you know, doing his
studies there. So the band was kind of famous for having him, because that was
his excuse for having his hair long, he was in a band. “I have to have long
hair, I’m in a band!” That was my excuse all through high school. And so they
were playing at a local music festival, along with The Byrds, and a band
called The Shadows Of Knight. And we went to see them. And we thought, “God,
they’re pretty cool.” You know? And they play blues. I know the blues. Mixed
in with some R&B and stuff. I’ve played some blues, so I’m not completely
unfamiliar. So we decided to go see them again at their home gig a little
later, which was in a small club called the Artist Hut in Philadelphia. Held
about a hundred people. And as it turned out, they were between drummers. You
know, different guys were just sitting in with the band, and they couldn’t
find a drummer who really worked with the band. Of course, I was with a guy
who was a Buddy Rich-trained drummer, so he asked if he could jam. He sat in
with him and then they started begging him to be in the band. And he stood up
for me and said, “Well, I’m with him. You’ll have to put him in the band as
well.” Fortunately, that made the line-up of the band exactly the same as the
Paul Butterfield Blues Band. And so the guy who was their
rhythm guitar player, he moved up front and started playing harmonica, and I
became, quote, “the rhythm guitar player.” But the one thing I knew how to do,
that the other guitar player didn’t know how to do, was play slide guitar. It
was kind of like a little specialty of mine. And so that got me more and more
attention in the context of the band, and I became a little local celebrity at
that point. But playing blues and R&B and stuff, and not even thinking
about writing. You know, I had no kind of big plan. I didn’t know how long the
whole gig would last. And in the end it didn’t last much more than eight or
nine months. What happened is, maybe six months after I joined the band, all
these records started coming out from San Francisco with the tag “acid rock.”
You know, there was the Grateful Dead, and the [Jefferson] Airplane, and other
sort of bands, who were kind of proud of the fact that they took drugs, and
that drugs had an influence on their sound. So, suddenly this blues band
decides, “We’re gonna go to the country and get our head together.” Which
means, go to the country and take a lot of drugs, and come back with a whole
brand-new revolutionary sound. And I was a teetotaler at the time. You know,
everyone around me who was taking drugs seemed to behave so foolishly that I
felt I was being superior by not taking drugs at all. And so when they decided
to do that, I said, “I’m not going to the country. I don’t wanna get my head
together.” And so I decided at that point I would put a band together, and
that band turned out be The Nazz. What I did is, I went around to all the
local bands and kind of watched them play and then, one by one, picked off the
guys from the band. And we became instantly the thing to see in the
Philadelphia area, for what it’s worth, but still had no idea where to go with
this. But the one thing I did realize is, if it was going to succeed, I -
as well as anybody else who had the capacity - was going to have to start
writing material for the band. And that’s when I, by conscious decision,
essentially became a songwriter. It was never a thing that I had done before
that.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Can you remember your first gig with the band?
Todd Rundgren 
The first song was “Hello It’s Me.” The first song I ever finished.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Maybe give that a listen in the original Nazz version, for now.
(music: The Nazz – “Hello It’s Me”)
Todd Rundgren 
[comments over music] Oh, who’s that? [laughs] Makes it sound really sad.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
So, just for clarification, that’s not you singing.
Todd Rundgren 
No, it’s not. [laughs]
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
So, I guess it’s a little bit like when you’re having kids. You know, you
wrote this song, or you were walking around with this thing for nine months,
and then all of a sudden someone else holds it in his hands, or in his voice.
What’s that like?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, at first, you’re very self-conscious about the whole thing. Well, at
least for me, I felt kind of self-conscious. I didn’t really know what I was
going to write about, half the time. And in the long run, as it turned out, I
was writing over and over and over again about the same relationship I had in
high school, that just didn’t turn out the way I expected.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
How many years did it take you to realize that?
Todd Rundgren 
Oh, that was only a couple years later. I graduated high school in ’66, The
Nazz’s first record came out in ’68. So, it wasn’t a whole long time, you
know? But yeah, that kind of heartbreak becomes a huge inspiration in the long
run. And by the time I got to an album like
Something/Anything?, and finished the record and listened back to what I’d done, I
realized I was digging the same hole again, over and over and over again. And
that’s part of what precipitated the radical transformation that the following
album represented, in which I kind of tossed any preconceived notions about
songwriting out the window, and started, essentially, from scratch. Trying to
build a new sensibility, or trying to listen to music in a different way, so
that I wouldn’t be doing what everyone else was doing all the time. Which is
essentially, you grow up listening to music and you make the assumption that
that’s what music is. And if all you ever hear is verse, chorus, verse,
chorus, bridge, chorus, chorus, chorus, and it’s always about some
relationship with someone, well, then you start writing music and that’s the
first thing you do. This is a verse, this is a chorus, and it’s all about how
somebody broke my heart. And I realized that that was not what my internal
life was really about. I was thinking about a lot of other sorts of ideas, a
lot of different sounds. By this point, I am taking psychedelic drugs, so I’m
seeing the world in a somewhat different way, and realizing that there’s more
than just relationships to write about; there’s your whole inner life to draw
on. So I became essentially a... Well, it’s hard to explain this. For most
people, if they’ve experienced some success, this is the formula they’ve been
looking for. And so they say, “I’m gonna do this again. And again and again
and again, for as long as it succeeds for me.” But after the experience with
The Nazz, I didn’t want to be in a band anymore, and indeed, I didn’t really
want to be in the front part of the music industry. I wanted to be in the back
part, where the actual product was made. So I started working for the Albert
Grossman organization. Albert Grossman was the world’s premier
artist manager at the time. And he had – not necessarily simultaneously – but
he had Bob Dylan, he had The Band, he had Janis Joplin, he had a whole slew of
folk artists, he had me, he had a couple of other more contemporary artists.
But I joined the organization specifically to make records, to engineer and
produce records for them. And I was still writing, I still had musical ideas I
wanted to explore. So I went to the label and said, “Would you give me a
budget, so I can do a solo album?” Which they did, and when I delivered the
record, they were kind of taken aback, because they didn’t expect it to be so
ambitious, and they also didn’t expect it to have a hit single on it, which I
didn’t expect, either. And so my very first record had a radio hit on it.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Which was?
Todd Rundgren 
“We Gotta Get You A Woman.”
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Shall we probably play that?
Todd Rundgren 
With the caveat that this song does not represent this album as a whole.
There’s some goofy stuff on this record.
(music: Todd Rundgren – “We Gotta Get You A
Woman”)
[comments over music] This is the part of the song that got me in trouble.
Because people don’t pay attention to lyrics. Until something pops out, and
then they think they’ve got the whole meaning of the song. [music continues] [applause]
I was sort of taken by the geeky stereo, you know? ’Cause back in those days,
sometimes the studios would not have pan pots. In other words, you couldn’t
place something anywhere in the stereo range you wanted. It could be center,
left, or right, you know? And then they might bring in a box with a knob in
it, if you insisted on having something that moved during the mix. So
everything would have this really wide stereo split in those days.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
I guess your shrink, if you had one at the time, had a field day when that
record came out, right?
Todd Rundgren 
Beats me. [laughs] As I say, the record was a hit, but it was also a
problematic hit, because of people misinterpreting the lyrics. Just because I
used the word “stupid,” they think I was referring to women, when I’m not
referring to women, I’m talking about stupid little characteristics that
people have. You know, funny little quirks and stuff like that. But there was
a very militant feminist movement in those days, and radio stations were
getting bomb threats over playing this song. Because some people just
misinterpreted the lyrics as having some kind of blanket meaning, when it was
really talking about something very specific. But, to me, the most unusual
thing about the song is its nontypical form. You know, it isn’t A/B/A/B, that
kind of thing. And indeed, the hookiest part of it is the very end of it, when
it’s almost over. So, I obviously, at the time I was recording it, wasn’t
thinking, “Oh, this is gonna be a hit single.” I just had an interesting
musical idea to explore.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT
What was the basic musical idea? I mean, we conveniently have this little
thing there. And if you could break that down, I think that would be greatly
appreciated.
Todd Rundgren 
Well, if I could remember it ’cause I’ve never played it live. Ironically
enough, we did the song the other night on the Letterman show as well, and it
was really amusing listening to the band trying to work out the background
vocals. Especially, because I had such a little-boy voice back then, you know?
And listening to Paul Shaffer trying to sing those falsetto notes is just
hysterical. [fiddles with keyboard] Actually, listening back to it, the most
interesting and signature thing to me, if I was another songwriter, you know,
people always ask me about the kind of harmonic sensibility I have, and my
tendency to cluster notes, or to stack the chord in a way that’s a little bit
different. And it kind of all came from when I was in high school, I was a bad
student. I was determined to finish high school, I didn’t want to drop out.
But it was a horrible experience for me, and I didn’t like being at home. That
was a horrible experience as well. And my best friend, who I might normally
hang out with, he was a straight-A student, so he always had after-school
activities to do. He was in the acting club, and things like that. So I would
just hang around after school, killing time, so that I didn’t have to go home
with the other kids, and I might go home with my friend after he was done. And
the school had an auditorium with a little upright piano in it. So I would go
in there after school and just plunk around on the piano, not really writing
songs, but just moving around on the keyboard, figuring out things that I
liked to hear. And that’s when I got into this whole sort of major #7th thing.
In other words, nominally, people just play regular straight chords,
especially if you’re writing on a certain kind of instrument, like a guitar.
Guitar is set up and tuned to mostly play major and minor triads in certain
ways. But the advantage of the keyboard as a writing instrument, that I soon
discovered, is that you got all those notes right out there. You’re not
limited to the six possible notes you could get on a guitar, and they don’t
all have to be clustered in one area of the instrument because your hand isn’t
big enough. So, for example, a C chord. [plays a C major] Now, that’s a
pleasant-enough sound. And you say if you play the minor one [plays C
minor], then it’s sad, and if you play the major one [plays C major], it’s
happy. But people are more than just happy and sad. You know, they’re
sometimes in some other sort of region, and that’s where the major 7th comes
in [plays C major #7th]. This here, which is sort of like a combination of
the happy and the sad, in a way. In other words, this chord is a major chord,
but isn’t so uninteresting as it was. And then, of course, there’s the related
minor chords, but they don’t sound as sad as they would if they were just a
straight minor. You got a little bit more rich component to them. And then I
started getting into things of, like, bunching notes up against each other
[demonstrates], like phrasing them like this, or even like this. Seeing how
close you can get the notes to each other without it turning into some sort of
a blur. And at the time I was pretty much just doing this. [runs up and down
using chords] And that’s where a song like “I Saw The
Light” comes in. It’s my hand
just locked in this position, like this. It’s like a little dog walking up and
down the keyboard, with the head watching what I’m doing here, like, sniffing
its crotch, or whatever. But it became almost habitual, my hand would just
naturally go into that form. And by the time I got to a record like
Something/ Anything?, yeah, I’m writing this. [demonstrates] Well, that
sounds nice. “Moon, June, spoon / it was late last night / I was feeling
something wasn’t right...” It’s like, 20 minutes later, the song is written.
Which is great. Because sometimes when these things just come spilling out.
I’ve found, sometimes they have a more broad appeal, I guess, to the average
listener than if you’re trying to do something impressive, I suppose. Sure
enough, I thought, “This is a real simple, straight-ahead, easy-to-understand
song. I’ll pretend it’s a single and I’ll put it first on the record.” And I
said as much in the liner notes, I said, “If I got a single, this is it. I
don’t know it’s a single. But if I have one on the record, this is it.” And it
became a hit record. And then I had another single off it, and then I heard a
third single. I had “Hello It’s Me” come off of that as well. I essentially
went back and re-recorded the first song that I ever wrote and that became a
hit. But all of it was sort of based around this whole sort of way of phrasing
the changes. And by the time I got to the end of Something/Anything?, I was
starting to wonder whether I had not painted myself into a musical corner in
some sense. And it really started to bother me when people referred to me as
the male Carole King. Not because I hated Carole King, I was a big fan of
Carole King.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
I was about to say.
Todd Rundgren 
I was a fan of Carole King, but who wants to be compared to somebody else all
the time? You want other people to be compared to you, in the long run. So I
just made that decision that I was going to break that formula. Whatever I
did, I was going to try and destroy that particular formula to a certain
degree, or at least open myself up to a lot of different ways of hearing
things. And to draw more on the influences that I had had that didn’t easily
fit into a pop formula. And that’s when I started doing songs like “Zen
Archer,” the meaning of which is
a mystery even to me. But you start to just paint pictures at a certain point.
You free yourself from the whole idea of having to sing about a certain thing.
And then it suddenly becomes more like painting, it suddenly is a much freer
operation. “There’s nothing preventing me from going here and doing this. Why
did I think there ever was?” And I had the advantage, being a record producer,
of not having to link my commercial success with my artistic explorations. So
this was great for me, from a musician standpoint. Drove the record label
crazy because I wouldn’t stick with any one thing. Every record was a
reinvention, something different. Sometimes I would go back and do something
very conventional, just to make sure I didn’t lose my chops. I would do a
record like Hermit Of Mink Hollow, which was just straight-ahead songwriting, but
evolved into something else. In other words, the songs are not a bunch of love
songs, they’re songs about a whole variety of different things. About poverty,
and other things in the greater world, besides just a relationship between two
people. And then after that, I’m off on another tangent. And then I feel like,
at a certain point, I’m losing my guitar chops, because I’m writing so much on
the piano and playing everything on the piano live, so I start a band called
Utopia, so that I can play guitar. So now we’re writing progressive rock as
well in a collaborative setting. We all get together in the studio and start
throwing out musical ideas at each other, and trying to figure out ways to put
them together. You know, all little musical modules, or a bassline, or, “We
need a little something to go over top of that.” So someone else will throw
some little idea they’ve been working on into the mix, and eventually, through
this collaborative process we come up with music. But ultimately, in that
situation, I would wind up writing the so-called songs. Now, this kind of
leads to the big difference in the way I write, and what it’s sort of come to
at this point. Previous to A Wizard, A True Star, I would have to go to
somebody’s studio and pay them their rental fee and hire an engineer and such.
And that, of course, requires a budget from a label. And at a certain point, I
said, “I wanna make a certain kind of record, I wanna make the records a
certain way. I wanna have a certain freedom in the studio that often you don’t
have when you’re using a regular commercial studio where other people will
come in and compete with you for the time.” So I built a studio. I made a
reasonable amount of money doing some production, so I bought the equipment. A
friend of mine had a loft in New York City, and we built the first Secret
Sound. And essentially, it was our studio, our playpen. There was never a
clock, nobody ever paid any rent or anything, no studio fees for it. All you
had to do was show up with a reel of two-inch tape, and if nobody else was using the
studio, then you just had free reign of it. And I did a lot of my productions
there, and I did a lot of my albums there, until I moved to upstate New York
and built another studio there for myself.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
What would be a classical recording from the time of that first Secret Sound?
Todd Rundgren 
The evolution? Well, as I say, that was a luxury that few people could afford
in those days. And it wasn’t yet stylish, either, to have a home studio.
People still pretty much depended on regular commercial studios for their
production. But the long-term effect is that now there’s an entire generation
of people who do that, because everything has collapsed down to the laptop.
Things happen so fast that they don’t realize that this is only within the
last eight, ten years. Previous to that, the machinery was not robust enough
to do real sort of digital recording without the fastest, biggest, most-packed
desktop computer with DSP farm cards in them and things like that, and very
expensive external interfaces and things like that. So even for a reasonably
well-off, but not overly-well-funded artist might not wanna make that sort of
investment. Now all you got to do is buy the laptop, which you’re gonna have
anyway. You know, you’re gonna use the laptop for something. So all you need
nowadays is a laptop and something like Reason and an audio interface, and
you’re ready to roll. Which is essentially what I do now, I do everything on
my laptop. And I will never touch Pro Tools, if I can help it, again. Indeed, I
did a project recently. I was doing a little residency at Columbia University
in Chicago, where they have a music department and recording department. And
one of the projects I was supposed to do was take one of their groups, whose
specific mandate was to record, and within, like, two evenings come up with a
final recording. And I had so much trouble with Pro Tools, and I didn’t even
have to operate it, but it was that typical thing, where things just become a
mess after a while. You know, there’s just fragments of stuff all over the
place. And so, in order to save time mixing, I had them stem everything out
and I put it into Reason. And I had the thing mixed in an hour. So, for my
money, I will never go back to Pro Tools, and I don’t see why anybody would.
But that’s how things have evolved. And people don’t realize that it’s only
even in the last few years that that kind of power has collapsed down into the
laptop. It reminds me a lot of when I first started out, and I had the studio,
and I had the ability to go in there and learn hands-on, spend all the time I
wanted, use the studio, essentially, as part of the songwriting process.
Indeed, as time went on, the recording and the songwriting process become
almost the same process. In other words, you’re moving towards the final
product with every iteration that you do. You start out with, say, just the
most easily available drum sounds that you’ve got, on some little drum box,
and you just set up a beat. And then you start figuring out a bassline. Then
you start figuring out other lines and maybe changes and stuff to go over
them. Then you start moving things around. Then you decide you want a better
keyboard sound, so you improve that. Then you start thinking about what might
be missing and compensate for that. And for me, personally, the actual so-
called songwriting part of it is the very last thing that happens. I’m trying
to create something that inspires me, in the end, to come up with a lyric for
it. And that process has become more and more a subconscious process. In other
words, it’s impossible for me to explain exactly how it works, and I can’t say
that it would work necessarily for any other particular person. But I do a lot
of musical research before I start a project. And particularly my recent
project, because I wanted it to be a contemporary-sounding recording, so I
wanted to figure out what contemporary music sounded like. I tend often to go
into a sort of isolation when I go home. I don’t necessarily want to listen to
a lot of music, or treat it like it’s my job to be up-to-date on everything. I
want it to sort of find its way to me, sometimes. In this particular instance,
I wanted to go find it wherever it happened to be. So, asked my kids, asked my
friends’ kids, “What do you think is a good place to start?” And they gave me
a few names, and I went to YouTube. And the great thing about using that for
research is you got the sidebar there, you know, of related things. So you
start in one place, couple clicks later you’re in a whole other place,
unexpected place. So you don’t have to know the names of what you’re looking
for, the titles of the songs or the names of the artists, you just have to
have a starting place. And once you get a starting place, all of that stuff is
eventually going to find its way to you. So, anyway, I essentially listened to
everything that seemed relevant to what I was trying to do. That all found its
way into the music. You know, the bass is a whole new instrument nowadays and
requires a kind of a philosophy about how to use it nowadays. It’s much more
up-front than it used to be. It’s much more highly manipulated, and if you’re
not careful what you’re doing, it can totally lose its original function,
which is to provide some weight to the bottom of the music. So I often find
that I’m using two or three basses during the course of a song, two or three
bass drums during the course of a song. Whatever is necessary at any
particular point during the arrangement to make it succeed. Which is totally
different than starting out with the limitations of, say, a drummer, and a
guitar player, and a bass player, and only the sounds that they can make. That
is a great way to make music. But it’s not the way music is made nowadays.
It’s historically the way that music is made and you can still make music that
way, but in terms of where the edge is, it’s really being made by lone
individuals who don’t feel that they have those sort of sonic limitations.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Do you feel that liberating for you, personally?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, one of the reasons why I got into this is that a lot of younger
musicians have been name-checking me. I’ve been doing remixes for them, and a
lot of it has to do with records that I did back in the ’70s, when we first
got the studio built and it was, yeah, liberating. We had no restrictions in
terms of time, in terms of sound, in terms of what you wanted to write about.
We had complete blank slate. And the only limitations were our own when we
didn’t understand how to work something. And often that characterizes how you
ultimately get what you get out of it. People call me a multi-instrumentalist,
but I really can only seriously play one instrument, and that’s the guitar. I
can play the piano, but if I sing along while I’m playing the piano, I get too
into the song, I completely lose track of where my hands are, it just becomes
a mess. But through the years I’ve always felt that if you can find the proper
setting for an instrument, you can do almost anything. So, at one point I
bought an oboe. And I never actually learned how to play the oboe, but I
learned how to make a sound with the oboe, and then I figured out where that
sound would go in the music. Suddenly people think I’m an oboe player. Same
thing with the saxophone. I could play the saxophone reasonably well. I can’t
anymore, because it’s one of those things you have to do constantly if you’re
gonna play it well. But for a while I was into the saxophone, and then as soon
as I got enough of a embouchure to hold a note, I just figured out the bits
that I could play, the modes I could play in. I’d have to write the song in
the only key I knew on the saxophone, and then suddenly I’m a sax player. And
I think that kind of philosophy is a real contemporary one. You don’t
necessarily have to be an expert. You don’t have to start out by being an
expert. It’s one of these things... It’s a process, evolving into a
songwriter, or into a music writer of some kind, is not like, “Oh, I could
teach you.” I can’t teach you how to write a song. I can tell you how I write
songs, but I can’t teach you how to write a song. And I can make suggestions
about your songwriting process, but again, in the end, I can’t implement them.
For instance, one of the things that I came to realize when I was doing
songwriting evaluations out at Columbia University is that it’s dangerous to
write songs if you’re a singer, sometimes. Because you tend to write to your
voice, you tend to write to what feels good for you to sing. But then you have
these people writing songs that have only three notes in them. That they never
get out of this certain range because that’s the one they’re comfortable in.
And that makes for not very interesting songwriting. Sure, it’s fun for you to
sing, but it isn’t that fun for me to listen to. And I think that’s an
important thing for people to remember: you’ll wanna slip into habits of
songwriting. You’ll want to slip into them, and it may be the habit of writing
to your voice, or it may be the habit of writing to a form, or it may be the
habit of writing the same subject over and over again. You know, lyrics
nowadays can be very angsty. Everything’s about angst. Even though people are
not naturally miserable, you’re supposed to write songs about being miserable
nowadays for some reason. It’s like, how much misery can... [laughs] ...Can
Thom Yorke stand?
[laughter]
I mean, are you gonna kill yourself, or what? So yeah, there are also trends
in music and people tend to write to those trends. And I suppose, there’s
nothing wrong with that, either. But in the end, you’re trying to convey
something somebody else wouldn’t. And that’s why music has become such a
subconscious process for me, that I focus really on the musical aspect of it
first and create a whole foundation for whatever it is that I’m gonna do. And
then I realize I’m getting near the end of the process, time to finish. Sit
down, write the lyrics, sing it. And it all happens almost like automatic
writing, like I’m not even controlling my hand. And the only thing that makes
that possible to happen is because I’ve cooked it so long up here. A lot of
people think songwriting is, “Gotta get to a piano, start making notes.” For
me, that’s not it. I have to stop making notes. I have to stop doing the
habitual things that I would do if I’d first sat down at the piano or picked
up a guitar. I need to let my subconscious take control of this process a
little bit more, so that it’ll come out in a way that’s not fully expected,
you know, that even I don’t fully expect. And that way, I keep from repeating
myself. Otherwise, you’re not writing to your own personal formula, and it
just starts to come out sounding the same after a while.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Speaking of unexpected...
(music: Todd Rundgren – “Future”)
Now, how old were you when you wrote this?
Todd Rundgren 
That’s from Liars.
That’s only within the last ten years. So, I was late-fifties.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
So, was that somehow interrelated with your YouTube research?
Todd Rundgren 
That one? There was no YouTube at the time. [laughs] Well, there was
YouTube, but it was not what it is today. Yeah, that came out about 2003?
2005? I’m not sure. Might’ve been 2005. So, yeah, it’s about nine years ago.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
But did someone take you down to, I don’t know, Metalheadz at Hoxton Square
and play you a house record later, or what happened there?
Todd Rundgren 
Liars was a record that was principally inspired, from a musical standpoint,
by what was being used in commercials on television. Many of you are too young
to remember what commercials sounded like for the longest time. Everything
sounded like it was written in the ‘30s for an ensemble of singers, you know?
And it would always be the name of the product with a zippy little melody
behind it. And it was almost always composed specifically for that product.
They might license a familiar tune and then put their own words on top of it.
Then in the ‘80s or ‘90s, I’m not sure, someone got the brilliant idea to
start licensing songs that people were familiar with. And the first one, I
think, that really got everyone up in arms was the Beatles’ “Revolution.” And
I don’t remember the product, it might even have been for Apple, something
like that. But everyone flipped when that happened, you know? “What?! Using
pop songs for commercials?! How dare you! Pop songs are for listening to
outside of that context, and you’re making people think of cars and soda and
whatever whenever they hear the song now. You don’t think of revolution
anymore; you think of the product that the song was associated with.” So, this
eventually evolved into people who placed the music and stuff like that
looking for the most cutting-edge contemporary stuff, depending on what the
product is for, but looking for the most cutting-edge, contemporary music that
they could put into commercials to make them look hip, very today, kind of
thing. And so the music was just getting a lot more interesting in
commercials, and sometimes it was composed specifically, sometimes it was a
commercially available song that was behind the commercial, but rarely was it
a song that was written with the idea of, “This is our soap, buy our soap,”
you know? “This is our product, buy our product.” It’s all more about
lifestyle and setting a tone and things like that. So, the album mostly was a
combination of all this music I was hearing in commercials and also a concept
of using, for the most part, sounds that were, I guess, much more familiar in
the ’60s. That’s not the best example, of course, but if you listen to the
most of the record, you’ll hear lots of things that sound like Hammond
organ, or
Fender Rhodes, or very
much more traditional types of instrumental sounds. But at the same time
combining it with a lot of these more contemporary musical ideas. And the
album, as it turned out, was hugely successful for me, in a way. And got me a
whole lot of critical attention. And I can only attribute it to the fact that
I was making a conscious attempt to be contemporary; that my sources were
contemporary sources that everyone had access to and was familiar with. And
that process must have somehow connected. And the same thing, I guess, has
sort of happened with State, my most recent record. I have to confess that when I finished
the record... I haven’t done a record on deadline in a very long time.
Probably most of you are aware that the record industry is a different thing
nowadays, and for the most part you cannot depend on getting a label, for
starters. But you can’t depend on even having a record contract that lasts for
more than one record. And it was sort of unusual when I got approached just
about a year or so ago by a label, saying, “We will pay you to make a record,
and we won’t tell you what kind of record to make.” You know? “And we want to
put it out in the spring of 2013.” And so I said, “Well, you know, I hadn’t
even thinking about a record, or the record I’d been thinking about was a
long-term project.” And so I had to come up with a new idea right away,
because, “Hey, I’m on deadline now, I got to finish it by January.” And so I
decided I was going to do that research, go out and go on YouTube and listen
to everything that was sort of popular and stuff. As it turns out, it’s also
the kind of thing that’s appearing in commercials as well, because now
everything sounds like Skrillex. Even ads for the most pedestrian things all
have that Skrillex-y bass line under them.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
You thought about getting a little bit of an undercut.
Todd Rundgren 
What’s that?
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Did you think of getting a little bit of an undercut?
Todd Rundgren 
Ah, well, I did that already. See, there’s so few things I haven’t done. Like,
I had to get married on my 50th birthday just to surprise my friends.
[laughter]
So, in any case, Skrillex isn’t the only thing happening. There are whole
other realms of stuff, and a lot of it is instrumental, it doesn’t necessarily
have a lot of lyrics. It may have a catchy line in it, like “Bangarang” or
something. But I figured my advantage is, I have a history as a songwriter, I
can sing, and I can write words, which a lot of the laptop kids are challenged
in doing, you know? And there’s so no reason why they should have to, they
make enough progress as it is. But I figured, if I’m going to have an edge, in
any case, I’m gonna have to apply my best songwriting chops to this as well.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
It sounds like you still consider this to be, like, a competitive environment,
in a way.
Todd Rundgren 
Well, there’s only so many hours in the day, you know? Actually, it’s not so
much competitive as it is, maybe, insular, I suppose. These people all
communicate with each other, and know each other fairly well. But it’s one of
those things, you can’t just stride in and say, “Hey, I’ve been making records
for 40 years. Let me in the club.” You know? [laughs] Or something like
that. But my advantage is that a lot of artists, a lot of younger artists, do
go back, even to the ’70s, to hear what was happening. They discover some of
what I’ve done, and then artists like Tame Impala have decided that they want
to do their version of A Wizard, A True Star. Which doesn’t sound anything
like it, but it’s their take on it.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Did they have the costumes, as well?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, even though they’re doing a record from the ’70s, they dress like
they’re in the ’60s. Bell-bottoms and stuff like that, you know? Because their
whole thing is this neo-psychedelic sort of thing. And even though all of my
music isn’t psychedelic, there is some signature elements in it that work for
the formula as a whole. But, ironically enough, they’re doing kind of like
neo-psychedelic music, and they asked me to do a dance remix for them, so...
But it’s that kind of loop closing that kind of got me into this, into
figuring out, “Well, why is it that they’re interested in what I used to do?
Maybe I should be more interested in what I used to do,” instead of some other
particular thing. And that’s when I realized I had been spending a lot of time
in my so-called studio environment, with a laptop or whatever, trying to
recreate the sound of natural instruments. Like, going to a whole lot of
trouble to program the drums so that it sounds like a real drummer. And then I
realized that there’s diminishing returns in that. It’s not necessarily what
the audience cares about anymore, you know? They care about whether it’s
something new to them. Whether it represents a certain kind of energy to them,
a certain worldview. It isn’t just simply whether you like the tune or not, it
means more than that. You know, especially since so much of this music is
instrumental, it’s gotta be connected to something larger, which essentially
is a cultural movement of a sort.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Speaking of cultural movements and technology and the possibilities, you did a
record a little after the ’70s that sounded like this.
(music: Todd Rundgren – “Something To Fall Back On”)
So, what’s the instrument used on there?
Todd Rundgren 
That was an Emulator. It’s
actually one of the original samplers that used the five-inch floppy disks to store
everything on. And what’s, I think, curious about that is the kind of
sloppity, very human, rhythmic aspect of that song, and the reason why is
because the Emulator didn’t really have a sequencer in it. As a matter of
fact, there weren’t a whole lot of sequencers at all. I remember Roger Powell,
a bandmate in Utopia, wrote one of the first ones, called Texture. And Stevie
Wonder still uses it, because he doesn’t care what it looks like.
[laughter]
“It doesn’t have a graphical interface!” [laughs] Who cares? Yeah, I had to
essentially play everything, like the whole drum part, through the entire
song. And that’s why everything is kind of like ‘booiyaya’, you know, the
rhythm is all over the place. Other songs on that record don’t necessarily
depend on that kind of typical sound. Indeed, most of the other songs are
either more strictly acapella, or it’s not an attempt to sound like a typical
bass-and-drums thing. It’s a different sort of rhythmic texture. So, I
wouldn’t use that as necessarily a yardstick of a whole record.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
The thing that you show in the video, is that really an Emulator?
Todd Rundgren 
That was a Fairlight.
But I didn’t have that at the time that I made the record. I got that
afterwards, in the interim. I actually was an endorser, so I got it at a
bargain price. [laughs]
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Which would still be enough for a down payment of a house, I suppose.
Todd Rundgren 
Yeah, it was still a pretty expensive unit. But I defrayed it by showing up at
a few music shows and stuff like that, and doing that little demonstration. It
was funny, everybody knows what sampling is nowadays, but in those days, it
was a peculiar phenomenon.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
You had Stevie [Wonder], for example, at the Cosby show, and having the whole Cosby
family sing into the mic and then do a song of that. And I think the Muppets
was another one, where you had one of those, “Oh, crazy, what these machines
can do now”-kind of demos. Did you do any of those?
Todd Rundgren 
No. We did some funny things with it sometimes when we were demo-ing it. Like,
you’d get the audience to yell something out and work that into a song or
something like that, and work that into a song. Yeah, there was a lot novelty
to it in those days, and it was easy to abuse, as well. I think probably the
best use of it, that sort of sampling technology at the time, was Trevor Horn, “Owner of A
Lonely Heart,” that Yes record. When they came out, they had these big band
samples all through it, which didn’t sound exactly like a big band. You know,
they had that very sort of weird, dated sound, as if they had just been lifted
off an old lacquer record and put it in the right places, so it wasn’t
completely overused. But it was quite easy, once you got ahold of the sampling
technology, to just go completely berserk with it, and some people, they did a
good job. You know, Art Of Noise, they made a whole career out of that, of
doing things that didn’t sound real, but still had danceability and stuff like
that. That’s probably a foundational element in a lot of what’s going on
nowadays, is a band like The Art Of Noise.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
I kind of like how a lot of the things you’ve been doing, or a lot of the
albums, you feel there’s actual themes to them, in a lot of different ways.
Let me pull this one up. A very different theme to what you were doing there
is this one.
(music: Todd Rundgren - “Good Vibrations”)
Now, if anyone has seen Brian Wilson performing this in the last ten years,
there’s about 30, 40 people on stage, right?
Todd Rundgren 
[laughs]
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
How many were involved in this recording?
Todd Rundgren 
I had some help from other guys. Roger [Powell] gave me a lot of help. We had his wall
of Moogs set up in the Bearsville studio, and so a lot of the sounds we were
getting were simply imitative; they weren’t the real, original sounds, but we
managed to manipulate them into sounding like stuff. For instance, that’s not
real cellos, that’s a fuzz guitar, that we have manipulated sonically to sound
like cellos. Because I didn’t want to pay the money to get cello players in
there. The whole record, that was side one of
Faithful. Faithful was a record that I made about ten years after I got into the music business.
And it was essentially to represent what radio was like ten years earlier,
because even by then everything had evolved to something else. See, this is a
whole other story, the story of radio, and that’s also related to the whole
story of the music business, and how it wound up in the state it’s in now. But
by the mid-’70s, radio had already started to become overly syndicated. The
idea of the independent local DJ was becoming less and less of a standard, and
more of a rarity. And all of this had to do mostly with the fact that there is
no other business on the planet that has an ROI like the music business. ROI
means “return on investment,” and it’s not a term that means a whole lot to a
musician. But it is a term that means something to an accountant, when they’re
considering buying up an asset like a record label. And people discovered that
you can spend... This is still the mid- / early ’70s, and most people are not
spending a year in the studio making a record. They’re getting in the studio,
making a record in two weeks or so. And jeez, let’s just say it cost $100,000
to make that record. If you sold a million records, at retail – in those days,
maybe 12 dollars, at retail – the amount of material that’s going into the
record is probably less than a dollar’s worth of actual material. Then there’s
your manufacturing, shipping costs, etc. So just bump that all up to two
dollars there. And you sold a million copies of that record. That’s 12 million
dollars minus the two million dollars in actual costs. That’s ten million dollars
on a hundred-thousand-dollar investment. Movies don’t produce that kind of
return on investment, even the biggest movies. The whole number may look
really huge, but that’s because James Cameron spent a billion dollars making
the movie in the first place. I mean, freaking Nirvana, they made that record
for a reputed less than $25,000, Nevermind. Can you imagine? Somebody who
doesn’t know shit about music, they don’t know anything about the music
business, but they look at that bottom line and they’re thinking, “I want a
piece of that.” So, in the ’70s, as this ROI is starting to sink in to people,
how much money can be made in the music business, companies that had nothing
to do with music started buying up record labels, and running them from their
central accounting offices. Gulf and Western, I remember, just started buying
up labels and things like that. To the point that, by the time we get to the
end of the ’70s, some CPA, some accountant somewhere, in some holding company,
tells Warner Brothers, “This guy Van Morrison isn’t selling records like he
used to. Drop him.” And obviously, this was not anyone who had anything to do
with music making that kind of decision. I mean, Van was a difficult artist, I
admit. But he delivered a lot of hits to Warner Brothers and then they just
precipitously dropped him. And this became kind of the norm at that point. The
companies were not being run by people who knew anything about music. They
decided in the mid-’70s that taking a chance on a record and letting the
audience decide was no longer how they wanted to do business. They wanted to
apply market analysis, like they’re coming out with a new cereal, or
something. And they get a test audience and they play your record for them.
And the audience sits there with a little dial, you know, responding to the
record. In the end they come up with a number somewhere between zero and a
hundred. And report back to the record label. And if the number isn’t over,
like, 85 or something like that, the label says, “Well, it’s not worth us
spending the money promoting this.” That has absolutely nothing to do with
whether they believe in the record or not. They just want to be covered. They
want to make sure that they don’t make a false move by promoting a record that
everybody likes but that doesn’t actually sell. So this is another cut at the
foundation of the freaking business. You get to the ’80s and you discover that
the structure is: every label wants to have a Michael Jackson, who essentially
finances everyone else on the label. They’re waiting for a Michael Jackson
album to come out, just so people will go out to their record store to buy it
and maybe buy one other record. But not only that, all of the artists on the
roster who are losing money, they get a reprieve, because now the company’s
flush. You know, they put out a Michael Jackson album, now they get lots of
money, they can afford to do artist development again, or artist promotion.
But when the Michael Jackson’s started disappearing, that caused the collapse.
But the biggest thing that brought the record labels down was a refusal to
understand the evolution of their own customers, of their own audience.
Signature event: Sony Walkman. Suddenly listening to music is not a quality-
time event anymore. You don’t go home and unplug the phone and listen to a
record all the way through like you used to. Now, you put it on your Walkman
and you go out and jog, or ride on the subway and read the paper while you’re
listening. The music becomes wallpaper to your life. But record-label response
essentially was to start charging you tax for your cassettes. Turned into a
whole piracy issue. They say, “Oh, what’s really happening is people are
swapping mixtapes.” Completely ignoring the fact that people now prefer to
listen to their music that way. They prefer to take it with them. Then the
whole digital music phase starts to happen, and then we start to have MP3s and
that sort of thing. Again, what do they do? They start suing their own
customers. [laughs] They threaten and sue their own customers, not realizing
this is a part of the necessary and inevitable evolution of the way people are
going to get and listen to music. You couldn’t have invented digital media and
simultaneously have avoided this part of the evolution of it. Once it becomes
transportable, ephemeral like that, all the rules are gone. New rules. And you
had better figure out what they are if you want to survive in this business.
And I know this for a personal fact, because I put out a record called No
World Order. And
it came also in an interactive version. There was a little blurb about that in
this thing, and as the result of doing that, I was approached by a interactive
television experiment called the Warner Full Service Network. They had a
neighborhood in Orlando, Florida, that they had completely wired up with
fiber-optic cable and DSL in every house, the highest bandwidth they had at
the time. Couple hundred houses in this neighborhood, and each house was
supposed to get a prototype interactive TV box, which at the time was a an SGI
Indigo computer - bigger than a lot of the TVs that they were supposed to sit
on. And they were experimenting with things like ordering a pizza. You go onto
the TV and you pick out your toppings and stuff like that, in a glitzy,
interactive way. And then a little later, your pizza is delivered. So they
came to me, because I had done this No World Order interactive music thing,
it had a whole sort of interface and way that people could find things by, you
know, subjective keys instead of actually knowing all the titles that you
wanted to hear. We designed and prototyped the whole thing out, and then it
came time to find out whether people really did want on-demand music services
in their homes. In order to do that, had to put music on a server. So me and
my manager went to the special-products divisions of every major label at the
time. There were five, might have been one or two more, but five principal
labels. Explained to them what was happening. Not a single one would allow
music to be put on a server, none of them, not even Warner Brothers. This is
the Warner Full Service Network - a division of Warners - and even Warner
Brothers Records will not allow any music to be put on a server. That’s the
end of that. But the upshot of that was that they had gotten themselves into
such a bind with retailers like Walmart and people like that, who were still
stocking the old hard product, that they couldn’t even talk about the idea of
delivering directly to the customers. Any music you got had to go through a
middleman, had to go through a record store or something like that. Because,
essentially, you know, Walmart would simply remove all their product out of
spite. But what happened? Two years later, there’s eMule, three years later,
Napster. Four years later, lunch half-eaten. Ten years later, lunch gone. Just
because they could not figure out how people wanted to get and listen to
music. Seemed to be like the most basic thing you should understand about your
business. What are your customer’s habits? What do they like? What don’t they
like? They just went through the whole thing like they could establish any
rule they wanted, and all of us would just abide by it. So there are no tears
to be shed about the bygone record industry at this point. It was a great
thing that happened. It shook out all the avaricious and hypocritical and,
really, uninterested entities in the music business, and left those people who
really do care about records, about artists, about promoting them. And it also
created this wide-open field where you can promote yourself. You don’t need a
record label. If you can put up a hot video on YouTube, you’re on your way. If
you get yourself a million hits, you’re on your way. And so, in a certain
sense, that old record industry model? Good riddance. It’s never coming back,
thank God. [faux-cheery voice] Anyway, that’s the history of the music
business.
[laughter / applause]
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Seems like we need a bit of healing after all that pain.
(music: Todd Rundgren – “Healing, Part III”)
Now, this is called “Healing, Part Three,” which somehow assumes that there’s
other parts as well. And the album as such, what’s the idea about that
album [Healing]?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, I had a theory, and it’s not an uncommon theory, that music has more
than just a sort of salubrious, entertaining effect. That it can actually,
under certain circumstances, affect your overall attitude and your physical
well-being. And so I did an album – and this is back in the days where albums
have two sides, so you think in kind of like paired concepts. It’s hard to do
one whole thing of a piece, because you never know if people are going to flip
the record over. So, on the first side I essentially wrote a suite of songs
that was a kind of a parable or a little story, that was essentially about
someone... It was discovered that they had the power to physically heal
people. But the ultimate result of something like that is, are you actually
helping people when you do that for them? Because, first of all, there was the
Golden Goose syndrome, you know, that everybody wants a piece of this now. Or
everybody wants to get his hands on them, or whatever. It just becomes one of
these things where you would sometimes wish it had never happened to you. Even
though it’s ostensibly supposed to be a good thing; you have the power to heal
people. Suddenly everyone’s showing up and they’re not making any effort of
their own anymore. They just figure, “I’ll just go to this guy, and he’ll make
it all better.” So, in the end, the idea was to kind of turn the whole thing
around and say, “Yeah, maybe it’s possible that people can heal other people,
but wouldn’t it be much better if people could heal themselves?” Then they
wouldn’t need somebody else to heal them, you know? They’d be in charge of the
process themselves. But the other side was an actual attempt to see whether I
could make music that would have that effect. Whether the music itself could
actually have that power. So the second side is like a whole suite. It’s in
three parts, but they all weave together into one sort of continuous piece of
music. And the whole idea was to take people through a certain sort of mental
journey, a meditation, almost, in musical terms. And to craft the music in a
way that amplified that, or somehow made that process more easy, I guess. And
I can’t say with absolute certainty that, in the end, something like that
works for everybody all the time. But I have had people tell me that this
particular exercise, this musical exercise, did actually have some effect on
them. And I don’t know whether it’s an effect that a doctor would confirm, but
the whole point is: it’s all in your head anyway. People are perfectly capable
of making themselves well, and they’re perfectly capable of making themselves
sick, without any outside influence. People eat themselves to death all the
time. So, the whole idea that where your mind is at and where your body is at
is somehow connected and interactive seems like a viable idea. So, making
music that helps people or heals people is, I think, a potential reality and
something that somebody might wanna commit their life to, their musical
career, to coming up with music that’s meant simply to, not just entertain
people, but to actually help them.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
At the same time, this is coming from someone who’s also characterized as, if
you work with him in the studio, and you don’t want to know about your
shortcomings, you better don’t enter the place. How do you deal with that
human energy in getting to a really good result?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, different producers have different styles. And I don’t mean just like
what the records sound like in the end, though. It’s the way they work. Some
producers are, for instance, former engineers who may never have had any real
kind of first-hand musical experience; they only captured music for other
people. So, transitioning from engineer to producer will only work if the act
comes in and they know exactly what they want to do musically, and you’re just
in charge of the sound. You just make sure that it sounds right. Then again,
there are producers who may understand very little about the technology of
making the records. I imagine George Martin probably didn’t pay a whole lot of
attention to that part of it, you know? He was totally focused on the musical
aspect of it, getting the music in the best possible shape. And a lot of
producers, that’s their forte as well. I, early on, decided that I wanted to
know how all the knobs and buttons worked. So I started out, more or less, as
an engineer before I became a producer. My first project was engineering a
Jesse Winchester record in Toronto, and Robbie Robertson of The Band produced
it, and The Band played on it. But as a result of that, they decided they
wanted me to do Stage Fright, the record they were about to start. So, it
was kind of a progression from someone whose only concern was supposed to be
the sound, to someone who then had to sort of deal with the personalities
involved in making the sounds. And this was something I didn’t understand very
well at the beginning, in some of my early projects, is that you are sometimes
– or at least you’re supposed to be – the adult in the room. Sometimes you’re
the only adult in the room. Bands, just because they got in the studio,
doesn’t mean that they have settled all their issues before they got there.
They often bring their issues right into the studio, however inappropriate
that might be. I believe the studio is, for most artists, is for making music
in. It’s not for arguing in. And it’s not for writing what you forgot to write
in. It’s to go in with the attitude that you’re going to perform this stuff.
And you’re going to perform it as if you were performing in front of an
audience, if you possibly can. Now, it doesn’t always have to be like that.
You know, it isn’t always about performance. As I say, these laptop things are
kind of built up instead of performed. But most of the acts that I work with,
they’re singers, players, stuff like that. They’re trying to capture their
best performance. And I will admit that at a certain point, I may be forced to
be very blunt with the act. What is my justification for being blunt with the
act? Well, I’m not there to make them feel good. I’m there to tell them all
the awful things that they will read about themselves if we don’t address them
while we’re in the studio. Now, they may not like hearing that, but that is
the whole point of my job. My job is to run interference for them in a certain
way, and warn them what’s going to happen if they go ahead and do that. If you
don’t write that third verse, that’s not gonna be a good song. That’s just
gonna be the first verse three times. I know it’s uncomfortable doing it this
way, perhaps, but if you can just forget about the fact that you’re in the
studio, and do it, we’ll get it done. But if you just wanna argue about it,
well, that isn’t my job. My job is not to argue with you about it. If you make
the decision to do it your way, fine, do it your way. But I have warned you. I
have warned you what you’re doing isn’t what you’re supposed to do. That’s my
job. That’s pretty much it. That’s a simplification in some sense, because I
believe my job is simply to fill in whatever’s missing in the process. If an
act comes in, and they write great songs, and they know how to perform, great.
I’m happy to just sit there and capture it, and have no opinion whatever.
Well, I’ll have an opinion about it, I will like it, ’cause they’re doing it
right. I don’t feel like I’m obligated to put my fingerprints on something
that somebody does, but often an act will come into the studio, and there’s
something missing in what they do. They have discomfort with the process in
general, and I have to remove all those distractions for them. They’re having
issues with another member of the band, and I have to somehow mediate that
because it does affect the process. My nose itches. It happens when I talk too
long, it’s warning me.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
I think that’s something that people in the studio reality sometimes tend to
overlook. It’s like, “Oh no, this person is mean to me.” Well, there’s a
certain romantic allure to get something really beautiful done, and sometimes
the way to achieve that is not always the prettiest.
Todd Rundgren 
Well, you were playing Laura Nyro earlier in the day. Laura Nyro, who was a
big songwriting influence on me. And the thing that really tipped it, I was
interested in what she was doing, I liked her songwriting, but she put out an
album called Eli And The Thirteenth
Confession, and it just blew everybody’s mind. Everybody’s. It blew my
mind, but it blew everybody’s mind, that a girl this young was singing with
this much soul, and the songwriting was hers, it wasn’t like anybody else’s
songwriting. And as it turned out, I met her at the time, ’cause I was such a
fan, I arranged a meeting. I went to her apartment and she turned out to be,
like, her pictures on her albums were very romantic-looking, but she turned
out to be, a very large gipsy. And her fingernails were so long that they
curled over. And when she played piano, they clattered on the keys [makes a
noise] the whole time. Couldn’t figure out how they managed to record her
without it becoming part of the record, you know? But I learned from her that
she hated the process of making Eli And The Thirteenth Confession. She felt
rushed, she felt like things didn’t get done the way that she wanted them
done. Here was a record that blew everybody’s mind, and she hated the
experience of making it. And that was a big lesson for me. I realized that how
much you enjoy yourself in the studio isn’t necessarily a measure of progress
or the quality of the final product. That sometimes someone has to drive you
to the edge before that kind of tension and immediacy and urgency in the
performance comes out. When someone tells you, “Well, we’ve gotta finish this
up in an hour, because this is a union session and everybody’s leaving,”
you’re feeling pressured. But that pressure is what’s making it more resemble
a live performance. Because I worked with Laura Nyro later. She was doing a
record called Mother’s Spiritual, and she had built a studio in her own
house in Connecticut, and she’d been working on it for a year and making no
progress, nothing happening. And I went there to try and just help her get
going, to get the project started. And we did manage to get the project
started. But a typical session would be, like, “Just finished take 23.” And
she says, “That was a nice one. Let’s do another.” And by the time she’s done,
she’s got 35 takes of a song, and then has to figure out which one to use. And
quite obviously, it’s like she doesn’t even know. She doesn’t even know when
it’s working or not. “That’s a nice one. Let’s do another. That’s a nice one.
Let’s do another. That’s a nice one. Let’s do another. I’ll figure it out
later.” You know? That makes absolutely no sense. I wanted to strangle her.
And maybe that would’ve made something happen, I don’t know.  [laughs] But,
you know, I loved Laura, and it was kind of a shame that she never got all the
recognition that she probably should have gotten. There’s just a whole
generation of songwriters who will tell you that that was a really influential
record.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
I guess, with her work, it’s really compelling how a certain fragility gets
across on the recording. How do you, personally, manage to put yourself into
that space where you’re extremely fragile and just convey that thickly layered
emotion?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, I close my eyes. [laughs] Essentially. And when I sing live, as well.
It’s just, for me, my most effective singing is just when I go into a space
somewhere and kind of almost forget that I’m in the middle of a process. And
just try to think about what it is I’m singing. That’s the most challenging
thing, often, is that you’re trying to bring meaning to something that
sometimes doesn’t have much meaning in it. You know, “Who Let The Dogs Out?”
[laughs] How do you make that? OK, we’re having a party. “Who Let The Dogs
Out?” We’re having a party. Alright, that solves that. But for a lot of things
you’re trying to sing something and implant, convey to someone more than just
the words. You want to convey more meaning, you want to convey some emotional
depth in it. And, for me, the whole process is trying to get in something of a
transportive state. To forget about where you are, be in the place where the
song is. And it can be difficult live. There are all these different
distractions. At the same time that you’re singing, you’re walking around the
stage and trying not to fall off it. So you’re not 100% there. You never can
be. You’d have to lay on the floor, so you wouldn’t hurt yourself. But as much
as possible, that’s the place that I’m trying to get to, you know, something
almost where you’re not even thinking about it, you don’t even know who’s
singing at that point. It’s just coming out somehow.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
On the subject of forgetting, a lot of your writing process, you once said,
comes from dreams and stuff.
Todd Rundgren 
Well, it doesn’t come from dreams. What happens is I will start working on a
project, and then I will start writing songs as a part of that project. So my
head suddenly gets into this space of writing. And that completely spills over
into my subconscious life, even when I’m sleeping. So I’ll suddenly, in the
middle of this, I’ll have a dream that I’m in the studio, listening on the
speakers to a song. And sometimes it’s a really simple song, something I
possibly would not even write. A song like “Bang The Drum All
Day,” I literally dreamed that
song. I didn’t dream every single word of it, I had to kind of figure out how
to move the whole thing along, but the whole chorus and everything: total,
total dream. I was lucky I was at home near the studio, so I could get up, go
down and capture whatever it is I remembered. I’ve had other songs, like I was
in Nepal and a song that eventually became “Lost
Horizon” came to me. But I was in
Nepal. I didn’t have a piano, guitar, nothing. So I developed a discipline of
playing the piano in my head. Of, like, visualising a piano keyboard and
picking the notes out and practicing it over and over and over again. ’Cause I
had to remember that song for like a month and a half, until I got home. So
that was just a discipline, that particular thing. And if I hadn’t had it, I
probably would’ve forgotten the entire song. And then I did a song called
“The Waiting Game” on a live
record. And it’s one of the most complicated songs I’ve ever done, from a
vocal standpoint. It’s got four completely different vocal parts all going
against each other in the chorus. And in that dream, when I dreamed that song,
I dreamed I was in the studio producing Manhattan Transfer, and that’s what
was coming out of the speakers. And fortunately then I was also near the
studio, I was able to remember enough of it and get it down. But it was
incredibly complicated in my head; I was real proud of myself when I captured
maybe 75% of it.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Any questions at this stage?
Audience Member 
I’m curious as to what the songs were that the young people that you were
talking to, when you said that you started to search around on YouTube,
directed you to? What were you listening to?
Todd Rundgren 
Ah, let me see now. Well, of course, Skrillex was probably like a starting
point, you know? But then I started running into artists like Tipper, and
Driz, and people who are doing stuff that’s kind of almost like movie
soundtracks. All sort of textural. You feel like you’re in the middle of a
rainforest sometimes. And so I wanted to get some of those real organic sorts
of things in. I didn’t find a whole lot of room for a lot of the straight-on
glitchy stuff, you know, I got a little bit of that in there. But that’s a lot
of fun, too, these kind of glitch-core records. But again, at the same time,
I’m not trying to literally ape anything. Like, one of the reasons why I can’t
rattle off a whole list of names is because as soon as I find something that I
think appeals to me, and I might want to incorporate it, I have to stop
listening to it. As demonstrated with my version of “Good Vibrations,” if I
think about it too much, I will cop it literally. I will do it note for note,
every aspect of it. I’ll spend hours and figure out exactly how it was done,
and I will reproduce it literally. So when I hear a lot of these things, I
have to put them in the back of my mind and stop, and only recall them, in a
way. That way, they’ll come back imperfect, and I won’t be imitating it. I’ll
only just be trying to remember it, at all. And there’s a lot of things that I
discovered that I figured, “Eh, maybe not for this.” But it’s a surprising
range of stuff. Like I hadn’t really listened to Bon Iver before, but I
thought, “Why not? I’ll listen to Bon Iver.” I liked it, couldn’t listen to
the record again until after I finished this record. Frank Ocean, you know,
listened to a little Frank Ocean. Gotta stop listening to that. Can’t imitate
that. You know, there’s something in there I like, but if I focus too much on
it, I’m just gonna start doing it literally. So yeah, a pretty broad range of
artists. Not just, you know, electronic artists, but...
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
But people would be curious about your version of going to Coachella and what
happens there, and talking about your music festival experiences.
Todd Rundgren 
Never been invited, so... That’s the problem. I never get invited anywhere.
Audience Member
Hi. I had a question about, when you were talking about sort of running
interference for people in the studio, like, how do you navigate when you’re
not getting what you want, and you’re working with...? I was gonna say a
sensitive artist, but, like, most artists are sensitive? But I had someone
tell me I poisoned the atmosphere once. [Rundgren laughs] Of course, a
vocalist. What do you do in that situation, when you’re just not getting it,
and you know they have it in them?
Todd Rundgren 
Well, a worse situation than that is when the artist doesn’t want a producer
anyway, and the record label makes them get one. That was XTC. Andy [Partridge] never
wanted anyone else to produce his records, he always wanted to do it himself.
But the end result of Andy doing that is they would never leave the studio.
Because Andy had stage fright, and their entire musical life became in the
studio. Soon as the record’s over, the fun’s done. And so he would drag the
process out forever. He burned up so many producers, whose work I admire, but
they could barely freakin’ finish with him. So there is that issue, you know,
where I might not be happy with what the artist is doing, the artist isn’t
happy with what I’m doing because he doesn’t even want me there. So, that can
be a real drag. I don’t know if I’ve found in a situation like that, because,
first of all, before I even consider taking on an artist, I say, “Send me your
material.” I want to hear the songs first. If I don’t like the songs, then we
don’t even discuss anything else. It’s just, “Find a different producer.” If I
like the songs but there aren’t enough of them, I say, “Well, get back to me
when you’ve got enough songs to make an album. I’m not gonna put faith in that
you’re just gonna come up with the material by the time the record starts.”
Because I’ve been caught in that bind as well. Act gets into the studio and
they got six decent songs and, you know, suddenly you’ve got them to write
four more of their better songs in a relatively short frame of time when
you’re supposed to be actually producing music. And I try and develop some
sort of a relationship with the artist. Go seem them live, meet them, have
some interaction with them before you get into the studio, so you have some
idea of what’s going on. That doesn’t necessarily always happen. I had never
met anybody in XTC before they showed up in the studio. And, in the end, I do
not waste studio time. I don’t go into the studio and allow things to devolve
into non-productive other things. In other words, if I’m not getting what I
want out of the artist at that particular moment, maybe I’ll get it another
moment. I call the session. Session’s over. Right? We’re not gonna spend our
time arguing in here. We’re not gonna spend our time trying to write a song
from scratch. If you wanna use the studio to do that, fine, but I don’t have
to be here for that. So I would say the best way to avoid that is: do your
homework before that project starts. Sometimes you’ll meet the band and you’ll
suddenly realize, “Eh, this guy’s got something of an attitude. I’m either
gonna have to be prepared for it, or I’m gonna have to pass on the project.”
Audience MEmber
Nice to meet you in person, I guess. There was a moment, I want to say, like,
a few years ago, and I saw the Midnight Special infomercial. They were like a
infomercial, when they’re selling the DVDs from that old TV series or
whatever. And I ran across that video of you and that’s kind of how I got into
your music and all that. As well as the Isley Brothers cover of “Hello, It’s
Me.” So I was watching the thing, and I’m like, “Yo, yo, that dude looks cool,
man.” My question is more so in terms of your live shows during that time.
What influenced you to dress like that, man? Was it like some David Bowie kind
of... You know what I mean?
Todd Rundgren 
Yeah, I know what you mean. There was an era in there where stage costumes
were real big. It was an important thing. I mean, that’s where Kiss came from.
Audience Member 
I wouldn’t have thought that that was how you would look listening to your
music, you know what I mean?
Todd Rundgren 
Yeah, and I have gone through a few looks. But that particular look that
you’re talking about is a result of the fact that I used to carry a make-up
and costume guy with me all the time. And he would carry a sewing machine, a
Maro machine, and when he got it in his head to make something for me to wear,
he would just make it. He would just show up with it, essentially. And that
whole thing with the feathers on my face and stuff like that, I didn’t suggest
that to him.
[laughter]
He’s over doing the Midnight Special and he says, “Oh, I got a great idea.”
Yes, he was gay. “I got a terrific idea!” And next thing you know, my face is
covered with feathers, I got this whole kind of outfit made out of feathers.
I’m the freaking Birdman of Alcatraz. And the record company just went
mental, because, as you say, the music that... “Hello It’s Me” doesn’t sound
like it belongs in that outfit.
Audience Member 
It did something visually. I thought it was dope, man. I did.
Todd Rundgren 
Yeah, but, you know, I tend to dress myself a little bit more lately. But
yeah, we do costumes all the time. I like dressing up on-stage. Sometimes it’s
a hassle and I’d rather just go up in my jeans or whatever. But we’ve done
these shows where we essentially theatricalize a whole album. Did one for A
Wizard, A True Star, and then did one for two records,
Todd and Healing. And for both
of those, you know, costumes. As a matter of fact, the Wizard, A True Star
show, I did 12 costume changes in 60 minutes. Essentially, a costume change
every five minutes. And it was a show that nobody got to see, you know? It was
hysterical, because I’d be wearing, like, three costumes at once. I’d have,
like, a jumpsuit on, and then tux-and-tails on top of that, and then an
astronaut suit on top of that. And what went on backstage was just hysterical,
me getting in and out of these costumes.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
That’s a thing I wondered, because when I saw the show, I think I’ve never
seen a higher density of over-50 white British males being so enticed by
really flamboyant costumes.
Todd Rundgren 
[laughs]
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
It was hilarious, that in itself. ’Cause everyone was there in this checkered
shirt. Like, exactly same haircuts, exactly the same glasses. Like, “We’re
gonna go and see Todd the God.”
Todd Rundgren 
[laughs] Well, it won’t be the last outfit I wear. I have a friend, she
likes to makes clothes, and she’s made some clothes for a recent tour. And so
there’s still costumery in my suitcase, I guess. Stuff that doesn’t look right
on the street. But it’s always been, at least in my history, it’s always been
part of it. One of the few family kind of activities we would have is every
once in a while my dad would take us to see a musical. Kismet, or Music
Man, or something like that, in which the costumery is an inherent part of
it. Dressing up is part of it. So I always felt that one way or another your
stage clothes are a certain sort of thing. [I] became really sort of conscious
of it because of the Beatles. They all had their special collar-less jackets
that they had made, on their first album cover. You know, they would all get
matching suits made. And then, of course by the time they got to Shea Stadium,
they had that weird little military look, epaulets and stuff. So everyone had
to have epaulets after that. And then, of course, Magical Mystery Tour, and
Sgt. Pepper, and all dressing up in the weird satin psychedelic clothes and
things like that. I was just always into the clothes, and I was, in
particular, into British clothes in the late ’60s. You know, when Carnaby
Street and King’s Road was still where it was at. And so I was actually living
with clothiers for a while in New York City, and every year I would go to
England for two weeks and buy all my clothes for the year. Buy twelve pairs of
crushed-velvet pants. Four velvet suits, you know? Five pairs of platform
boots. And haul it all back home, spend a year wearing it, and then go back
and shop again. So I have always been something of a clothes horse, I guess.
Audience Member 
Thank you.
Audience member 
Hello, thank you for being here. One of the things I really like about your
music, in terms of songwriting, is the, I guess, as a listener, the element of
surprise, in how the different parts of the songs are put together. It seems
like a lot of thought goes into that. I would like to hear what, in your mind,
is a good relationship between a verse and a chorus.
Todd Rundgren 
Well, it’s funny. There’s almost, in some ways, no real distinguishing
feature. You know, you figure the chorus is usually more succinct, I guess,
than the verse in a way. And the chorus usually is repeated, in some sense,
where the verse is maybe lyrically different all the time. But that isn’t
necessarily a formula for success, as it were. You know, in the songwriting
sense, not necessarily in the commercial sense. Often I’ve discovered, after
going back, that I can’t figure out what to call some of the parts in the
song. Because, even take a song like “I Saw The Light,” the chorus is so
perfunctory, in a way, that it’s almost not a chorus. I sing a whole lot of
verse-verse, you know, “It was late last night, wasn’t right, blah blah blah,”
everything that rhymes with “ite.” And then a little bridge part. “You gaze up
at me, the answer was plain, saw the light, in your eyes, in your eyes.”
That’s it. “In your eyes” twice. That’s the whole chorus, essentially. Until
it gets to the end of the song, and then I just repeat that line over and over
and over again. I mean, it’s a line. It isn’t even a whole chorus. So it’s
sometimes hard to distinguish these things by the sort of terminology. What is
a verse? What is a chorus? I think it’s probably more legitimate to still use
the term “hook.” There’s gotta be something that sticks with the user when the
song is over. And it can be in any part of the song, probably. You know? It’s
just gotta be something that sticks with them. And often, as a producer, I
have to kind of make that judgment, whether that thing is there or not. I have
to tell the artist, “Well, still something missing in here. There’s all the
elements of a song, there’s all verses and choruses and stuff like that. But
for some reason it wasn’t constructed in a way that any of it remains when the
song has ended.” And that, I think, is a more critical element. And often it’s
exactly the way that the notes and the words get paired up. Often, the most
difficult thing about the songwriting process is finding the right-sounding
syllables. It’s the difference between the meaning and what it sounds like
when you’re actually singing. So, there are just some things that are too
clumsy sometimes to be stated in the most obvious way. You got to find a
really roundabout way of trying to get the same idea out, so there’s a
difference between singing and talking. Singing, you have to say is probably
some extension of our sense of musicality in the world, in general. The sound
of a bell. The sound of a... We were taking a little tour here, and it’s
interesting to me the menagerie downstairs, with the microphones on it. You
know, trying to capture sounds essentially from nature, trying to find the
musicality that naturally exists in nature. And the problem with the human
world is it’s full of artifice, it’s full of artificiality. Things that we
invent that would never exist in nature. And the whole idea, I think, in terms
of music, is in some way getting back to nature. Getting back to what people
just find naturally pleasant to hear. And a lot of that is choosing the exact
syllable you sing, with a certain note, and stuff like that. Again, with that
caveat, in terms of songwriting, you don’t want to be writing to your favorite
way of singing. It’ll limit your writing in the long term. And I’ve always
used my writing as a way to extend my singing. I didn’t start out as a singer.
I learned to sing relatively late in life. And that’s really hard. I mean,
most people, they become singers when they’re young, when they’re in their
teens. They say, “I like to sing, and I’m gonna sing,” and they have that
abandon, and by the time they get to the age where you might have a career in
it, you develop the the physical things that you need. Your diaphragm gets
developed. Your ability to control your throat gets developed, in order to
properly hit the pitch, and all of that sort of stuff. So that by the time
you’re 19 or 20 and you’re in a band, you can stand up there and bellow your
heart out all you want. Me, when “We Gotta Get You A Woman” came out, and I
had to get out on the road and support it, I couldn’t sing a 40-minute set.
That’s how long a set was in those days, 40 minutes. And I couldn’t get
halfway through it without blowing my voice out. And that didn’t stop me,
though. I continued to write out of my practical range. As long as I could hit
the note in the studio, that was all I cared about. And so I had to set kind
of like a bar for myself, so that when I finally got serious about the live
performance, I was strengthening my instrument the entire time. You know?
Getting better. My voice is in better shape today than it’s been in my entire
life. Works better for me now than it ever has, for some reason. And that’s
probably one of the remarkable things about the voice. I mean, Tony Bennett, I
don’t get it. How the hell does he do that? You know? How does he hit those
notes? You know? And he’s 20 years older than I am. So, it’s one of those
things that I think is possible for anyone. Anyone could potentially become a
singer if I can, starting from scratch, from nothing. From being principally
able to hold a tune and little else. But my songwriting has been part of that
whole evolution, that I write material sometimes that’s at the extremes of my
range to force myself to get better at singing in that part of my range.
TORSTEN SCHMIDT 
Looks like this is a really good moment to thank you very much for coming
along and sharing with us. So, Todd Rundgren, everybody.
